food insecurity and pediatric obesity affect young children. we examine how food insecurity relates to obesity, underweight, stunting, health, and development among children <4 years of age. caregivers of young children participated in a cross-sectional survey at medical centers in 5 us cities. inclusion criteria were age of <48 months. exclusion criteria were severely ill or injured and private health insurance. the household food security survey module defined 3 exposure groups: food secure, household food insecure and child food secure, and household food insecure and child food insecure. dependent measures were obesity (weight-age >90th percentile), underweight (weight-age <5th percentile), stunting (height/length-age <5th percentile), and caregiver-reported child health and developmental risk. multivariable logistic regression analyses, adjusted for demographic confounders, maternal bmi, and food assistance program participation examined relations between exposure groups and dependent variables, with age-stratification: 0 to 12, 13 to 24, 25 to 36, and 37 to 48 months of age. within this multiethnic sample (n = 28 184 children, 50% non-hispanic african american, 34% hispanic, 14% non-hispanic white), 27% were household food insecure. with 1 exception at 25 to 36 months, neither household nor child food insecurity were associated with obesity, underweight, or stunting, but both were associated with increased odds of fair or poor health and developmental risk at multiple ages. among children <4 years of age, food insecurity is associated with fair or poor health and developmental risk, not with anthropometry. findings support american academy of pediatrics recommendations for food insecurity screening and referrals to help families cope with economic hardships and associated stressors.

the american board of pediatrics (abp) certifies that general and subspecialty pediatricians meet standards of excellence established by their peers. certification helps demonstrate that a general pediatrician or pediatric subspecialist has successfully completed accredited training and fulfills continuous certification requirements (maintenance of certification [moc]). one current component of the moc program is a closed-book examination administered at a secure testing center (ie, the moc part 3 examination). in this article, we describe the development of an alternative to this examination termed the "maintenance of certification assessment for pediatrics" (moca-peds) during 2015-2016. moca-peds was conceptualized as an online, summative (ie, pass/fail), continuous assessment of a pediatrician's knowledge that would also promote learning. the system would consist of a set number of multiple-choice questions delivered each quarter, with immediate feedback on questions, rationales clarifying correct and incorrect answers, references for further learning, and peer benchmarking. questions would be delivered quarterly and taken at any time within the quarter in a setting with internet connectivity and on any device. as part of the development process in 2015-2016, the abp actively recruited pediatricians to serve as members of a yearlong user panel or single-session focus groups. refinements to moca-peds were made on the basis of their feedback. moca-peds is being actively piloted with pediatricians in 2017-2018. the abp anticipates an expected launch in january 2019 of moca-peds for general pediatrics, pediatric gastroenterology, child abuse, and pediatric infectious diseases with launch dates for the remaining pediatric subspecialties between 2020 and 2022.

over the past 20 years, the prescribing of opioids has increased dramatically in north america, with parallel increases in opioid addiction, overdose, and associated deaths. we examined whether young children of women prescribed opioids were at increased risk of opioid overdose. we conducted a population-based, nested case control study in ontario, canada, between 2002 and 2015. we identified children aged ≤10 years, whose mothers received publicly funded prescriptions for an opioid or a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (comparator analgesic) in the preceding year. cases were children who presented to hospital for or died of opioid overdose. each case was matched with 4 controls with no opioid overdose. the primary outcome was the risk of opioid overdose. we identified 103 children who presented to the hospital with opioid overdose and matched them with 412 controls. half of the children with opioid overdose were <2 years old. compared with controls, children with an opioid overdose were far more likely to have a mother who received a prescription opioid (unadjusted odds ratio, 2.41; 95% confidence interval, 1.68-3.45) and who was prescribed antidepressants. the most commonly implicated overdose opioids were codeine (53.4%), oxycodone (32.0%), and methadone (15.5%). young children of mothers prescribed opioids are at a markedly increased risk of overdose. physicians, pharmacists, and parents should take measures to mitigate the risk of opioid-related harm to children, such as prescribing smaller quantities, emphasizing the importance of secure medication storage, and the prompt disposal of unused opioids.

autism spectrum disorders (asds) often go undetected in toddlers. the modified checklist for autism in toddlers (m-chat) with follow-up interview (m-chat/f) has been shown to improve detection and reduce over-referral. however, there is little evidence supporting the administration of the interview by a primary care pediatrician (pcp) during typical checkups. the goal of this study was to evaluate the feasibility, validity, and reliability of the m-chat/f by pcps with online prompts at the time of a positive m-chat screen. forty-seven pcps from 22 clinics completed 197 m-chat/fs triggered by positive m-chat screens via the same secure web-based platform that parents used to complete m-chats before an 18- or 24-month well-child visit. a second m-chat/f was administered live or by telephone by trained research assistants (ras) at the kennedy krieger institute center for autism and related disorders. the autism diagnostic observation schedule, second edition, and the mullen scales of early learning were administered as criterion measures. measures of agreement between pcps and ras were calculated, and measures of test performance compared. there was 86.6% agreement between pcps and ras, with a cohen's κ of 0.72. comparison of sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (ppv), and overall accuracy for m-chat/f between pcps and ras showed significant equivalence for all measures. use of the m-chat/f by pcps resulted in significant improvement in ppv compared with the m-chat alone. minimally trained pcps can administer the m-chat/f reliably and efficiently during regular well-child visits, increasing ppv without compromising detection.

to evaluate the effects of behavioral interventions on the sleep/wakefulness of infants, parent and infant stress, and later child emotional/behavioral problems, and parent-child attachment. a total of 43 infants (6-16 months, 63% girls) were randomized to receive either graduated extinction (n = 14), bedtime fading (n = 15), or sleep education control (n = 14). sleep measures included parent-reported sleep diaries and infant actigraphy. infant stress was measured via morning and afternoon salivary cortisol sampling, and mothers' self-reported mood and stress. twelve months after intervention, mothers completed assessments of children's emotional and behavioral problems, and mother-child dyads underwent the strange situation procedure to evaluate parent-child attachment. significant interactions were found for sleep latency (p < .05), number of awakenings (p < .0001), and wake after sleep onset (p = .01), with large decreases in sleep latency for graduated extinction and bedtime fading groups, and large decreases in number of awakenings and wake after sleep onset for the graduated extinction group. salivary cortisol showed small-to-moderate declines in graduated extinction and bedtime fading groups compared with controls. mothers' stress showed small-to-moderate decreases for the graduated extinction and bedtime fading conditions over the first month, yet no differences in mood were detected. at the 12-month follow-up, no significant differences were found in emotional and behavioral problems, and no significant differences in secure-insecure attachment styles between groups. both graduated extinction and bedtime fading provide significant sleep benefits above control, yet convey no adverse stress responses or long-term effects on parent-child attachment or child emotions and behavior.

in recent years, the focus on patient safety and housestaff supervision has led to a steady increase in institutions providing 24/7 in-hospital (also known as in-house, henceforth referred to as ih) coverage by pediatric intensivists. effects of this increased attending physician presence on education of pediatric housestaff have not been studied. we hypothesized that ih coverage would decrease perceived autonomy of housestaff and negatively affect their preparedness to be independent attending physicians on completion of training. a secure, anonymous, web-based survey was sent to pediatric intensivists in the united states and canada, and pediatric critical care fellows and pediatric residents at academic centers across the united states. questions focused on perceptions of ih coverage and housestaff educational experience. we report 1323 responses from 147 institutions (center response rate 74%). although 96% of respondents stated that the picu provides "a good educational experience," only 50% of pediatric intensivists and 67% of housestaff feel that housestaff are prepared for independent practice after training in an ih model. compared with those training in home-call models, respondents currently working in ih models have more favorable perceptions of the effects of ih coverage on housestaff autonomy (p < .0001), supervision (p < .0001), and preparation for independent practice (p < .0001). pediatric intensivists and housestaff express concern regarding the preparation of housestaff training in a 24/7 ih attending model. an important priority for institutions using or considering a 24/7 ih attending coverage model is the balance between adequate housestaff supervision and autonomy.

the objectives of this study were to examine disparities in health insurance coverage for children with same-sex parents and to investigate how statewide policies such as same-sex marriage and second-parent adoptions affect children's private insurance coverage. we used data from the 2008-2010 american community survey to identify children (aged 0-17 years) with same-sex parents (n = 5081), married opposite-sex parents (n = 1369789), and unmarried opposite-sex parents (n = 101678). we conducted multinomial logistic regression models to estimate the relationship between family type and type of health insurance coverage for all children and then stratified by each child's state policy environment. although 77.5% of children with married opposite-sex parents had private health insurance, only 63.3% of children with dual fathers and 67.5% with dual mothers were covered by private health plans. children with same-sex parents had fewer odds of private insurance after controlling for demographic characteristics but not to the extent of children with unmarried opposite-sex parents. differences in private insurance diminished for children with dual mothers after stratifying children in states with legal same-sex marriage or civil unions. living in a state that allowed second-parent adoptions also predicted narrower disparities in private insurance coverage for children with dual fathers or dual mothers. disparities in private health insurance for children with same-sex parents diminish when they live in states that secure their legal relationship to both parents. this study provides supporting evidence in favor of recent policy statements by the american academy of pediatricians endorsing same-sex marriage and second-parent adoptions.

to promote optimal health and well-being of all children, the american academy of pediatrics (aap) supports access for all children to (1) civil marriage rights for their parents and (2) willing and capable foster and adoptive parents, regardless of the parents' sexual orientation. the aap has always been an advocate for, and has developed policies to support, the optimal physical, mental, and social health and well-being of all infants, children, adolescents, and young adults. in so doing, the aap has supported families in all their diversity, because the family has always been the basic social unit in which children develop the supporting and nurturing relationships with adults that they need to thrive. children may be born to, adopted by, or cared for temporarily by married couples, nonmarried couples, single parents, grandparents, or legal guardians, and any of these may be heterosexual, gay or lesbian, or of another orientation. children need secure and enduring relationships with committed and nurturing adults to enhance their life experiences for optimal social-emotional and cognitive development. scientific evidence affirms that children have similar developmental and emotional needs and receive similar parenting whether they are raised by parents of the same or different genders. if a child has 2 living and capable parents who choose to create a permanent bond by way of civil marriage, it is in the best interests of their child(ren) that legal and social institutions allow and support them to do so, irrespective of their sexual orientation. if 2 parents are not available to the child, adoption or foster parenting remain acceptable options to provide a loving home for a child and should be available without regard to the sexual orientation of the parent(s).

we explored the relationship between household food insecurity and maternal feeding styles, infant feeding practices, and perceptions and attitudes about infant weight in low-income mothers. mothers participating in the special supplemental food program for women, infants, and children with infants aged between 2 weeks and 6 months were interviewed. by using regression analyses, the following relationships were examined between food insecurity and: (1) controlling feeding styles (restrictive and pressuring); (2) infant feeding practices, including breastfeeding, juice consumption, and adding cereal to the bottle; and (3) perceptions and attitudes about infant weight. path analysis was used to determine if perceptions and attitudes about infant weight mediated the relationships between food insecurity and controlling feeding styles. the sample included 201 mother-infant pairs, with 35% reporting household food insecurity. food-insecure mothers were more likely to exhibit restrictive (b [se]: 0.18 [0.08]; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 0.02-0.34) and pressuring (b [se]: 0.11 [0.06]; 95% ci: 0.001-0.22) feeding styles compared with food-secure mothers. no associations were found with feeding practices. concern for their infant becoming overweight in the future was associated with food insecurity (adjusted odds ratio: 2.11 [95% ci: 1.02-4.38]). this concern mediated the relationship between food insecurity and both restrictive (p = .009) and pressuring (p = .01) feeding styles. increased concern about future overweight and controlling feeding styles represent potential mechanisms by which food insecurity could be related to obesity. obesity prevention should aim to decrease food insecurity and to reduce controlling feeding styles in families who remain food insecure.

the american academy of pediatrics (aap) supports development and universal implementation of a comprehensive electronic infrastructure to support pediatric information functions of the medical home. these functions include (1) timely and continuous management and tracking of health data and services over a patient's lifetime for all providers, patients, families, and guardians, (2) comprehensive organization and secure transfer of health data during patient-care transitions between providers, institutions, and practices, (3) establishment and maintenance of central coordination of a patient's health information among multiple repositories (including personal health records and information exchanges), (4) translation of evidence into actionable clinical decision support, and (5) reuse of archived clinical data for continuous quality improvement. the aap supports universal, secure, and vendor-neutral portability of health information for all patients contained within the medical home across all care settings (ambulatory practices, inpatient settings, emergency departments, pharmacies, consultants, support service providers, and therapists) for multiple purposes including direct care, personal health records, public health, and registries. the aap also supports financial incentives that promote the development of information tools that meet the needs of pediatric workflows and that appropriately recognize the added value of medical homes to pediatric care.

although e-mail may be an efficient clinician-patient communication tool, standard e-mail is not adequately secure to meet health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa) guidelines. for this reason, firewall-secured electronic messaging systems have been developed for use in health care. impact and usability of these secure systems have not been broadly assessed. to evaluate the impact of a secure electronic messaging system implemented for a pediatric subspecialty clinic. this study was performed in an outpatient, academic pediatric respiratory clinic in spring 2009 in new haven, connecticut. patients were surveyed prior to implementation regarding internet usage. the kryptiq messaging system was implemented and messages were monitored continuously and tracked. open-ended qualitative interviews with 28 users and nonusers were conducted, and we described the process of implementation. all of the 127 patients/families surveyed expressed interest in using the internet to contact their clinic providers, and they all reported having the ability to access the internet. in the 8 months after implementation, only 5 messages were initiated by patients in contrast to 2363 phone calls. themes emerged from the open-ended interviews that indicated promoters, barriers, and potential uses. prominent barriers included the lack of convenience and personal touch and being technically difficult to use. although these patients/families expressed strong interest in e-mailing, secure web messaging was less convenient than using the phone, too technically cumbersome, lacked a personal touch, and was used only by a handful of patients.

outcomes of pediatric button battery ingestions have worsened substantially, predominantly related to the emergence of the 20-mm-diameter lithium cell as a common power source for household products. button batteries lodged in the esophagus can cause severe tissue damage in just 2 hours, with delayed complications such as esophageal perforation, tracheoesophageal fistulas, exsanguination after fistulization into a major blood vessel, esophageal strictures, and vocal cord paralysis. thirteen deaths have been reported. the objective of this study was to explore button battery ingestion scenarios to formulate prevention strategies. a total of 8648 battery ingestions that were reported to the national battery ingestion hotline were analyzed. batteries that were ingested by children who were younger than 6 years were most often obtained directly from a product (61.8%), were loose (29.8%), or were obtained from battery packaging (8.2%). of young children who ingested the most hazardous battery, the 20-mm lithium cell, 37.3% were intended for remote controls. adults most often ingested batteries that were sitting out, loose, or discarded (80.8%); obtained directly from a product (4.2%); obtained from battery packaging (3.0%); or swallowed within a hearing aid (12.1%). batteries that were intended for hearing aids were implicated in 36.3% of ingestions. batteries were mistaken for pills in 15.5% of ingestions, mostly by older adults. parents and child care providers should be taught to prevent battery ingestions. because 61.8% of batteries that were ingested by children were obtained from products, manufacturers should redesign household products to secure the battery compartment, possibly requiring a tool to open it.

the goals were to generate a cumulative hardship index and to evaluate its association with the well-being of children 4 to 36 months of age without private health insurance. cross-sectional surveys were linked to anthropometric measures and medical record review at 5 urban medical centers (july 1, 2004, to december 31, 2007). cumulative hardship index scores ranged from 0 to 6, with food, housing, and energy each contributing a possible score of 0 (secure), 1 (moderately insecure), or 2 (severely insecure) to generate scores indicating no hardship (score of 0), moderate hardship (scores of 1-3), or severe hardship (scores of 4-6). the outcome was a composite indicator of child wellness, including caregivers' reports of children's good/excellent heath, no hospitalizations, not being developmentally at risk, and anthropometric measurements within normal limits. covariates were selected a priori and through association with predictors and outcomes. of 7141 participants, 37% reported no material hardship, 57% moderate hardship, and 6% severe hardship. multivariate logistic regression analyses showed ordinal association between the cumulative hardship index and children's adjusted odds of wellness (severe versus no hardship, adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 0.65 [95% confidence interval [ci]: 0.51-0.83]; severe versus moderate hardship, aor: 0.73 [95% ci: 0.58-0.92]; moderate versus no hardship, aor: 0.89 [95% ci: 0.79-0.99]). increasing levels of a composite measure of remediable adverse material conditions correlated with decreasing adjusted odds of wellness among young us children.

youth violence continues to be a serious threat to the health of children and adolescents in the united states. it is crucial that pediatricians clearly define their role and develop the appropriate skills to address this threat effectively. from a clinical perspective, pediatricians should become familiar with connected kids: safe, strong, secure, the american academy of pediatrics' primary care violence prevention protocol. using this material, practices can incorporate preventive education, screening for risk, and linkages to community-based counseling and treatment resources. as advocates, pediatricians may bring newly developed information regarding key risk factors such as exposure to firearms, teen dating violence, and bullying to the attention of local and national policy makers. this policy statement refines the developing role of pediatricians in youth violence prevention and emphasizes the importance of this issue in the strategic agenda of the american academy of pediatrics.

because of their elevated need for services, health insurance is particularly important for children with special health care needs. in this article we assess how well the current system is meeting the insurance needs of children with special health care needs and how emerging trends in health insurance may affect their well-being. we begin with a review of the evidence on the impact of health insurance on the health care experiences of children with special health care needs based on the peer-reviewed literature. we then assess how well the current system meets the needs of these children by using data from 2 editions of the national survey of children with special health care needs. finally, we present an analysis of recent developments and emerging trends in the health insurance marketplace that may affect this population. although a high proportion of children with special health care needs have insurance at any point in time, nearly 40% are either uninsured at least part of the year or have coverage that is inadequate. recent expansions in public coverage, although offset in part by a contraction in employer-based coverage, have led to modest but significant reductions in the number of uninsured children with special health care needs. emerging insurance products, including consumer-directed health plans, may expose children with special health care needs and their families to greater financial risks. health insurance coverage has the potential to secure access to needed care and improve the quality of life for these children while protecting their families from financially burdensome health care expenses. continued vigilance and advocacy for children and youth with special health care needs are needed to ensure that these children have access to adequate coverage and that they fare well under health care reform.

pediatric venous access causes unnecessary anxiety and pain in children and, in turn, can have detrimental consequences. behavioral approaches to pediatric venous access distress management can be organized temporally. specifically, preparation before the procedure includes providing children with sensory and procedural information in an age-appropriate manner and providing training in coping skills. it is important to consider the timing, format, and content of the approach to provide optimal preparation for the unique circumstances of the individual patient. in addition to the child patient, preparing parents and teaching them which specific behaviors might be most helpful to their child should prove valuable to both patient and parents. during the procedure, there are benefits to providing secure and comfortable positioning. in addition, researchers recommend that adults encourage children to cope and actively engage children in distracting activities. for infants, there is support for the distress-mitigation properties of swaddling, skin-to-skin contact, breastfeeding, and sucrose. after venous access, distraction and encouragement of coping should speed recovery. in sum, research in behavioral approaches to pediatric pain management has provided recommendations for minimizing children's anxiety and pain associated with venous access.

household energy security has not been measured empirically or related to child health and development but is an emerging concern for clinicians and researchers as energy costs increase. the objectives of this study were to develop a clinical indicator of household energy security and assess associations with food security, health, and developmental risk in children <36 months of age. a cross-sectional study that used household survey and surveillance data was conducted. caregivers were interviewed in emergency departments and primary care clinics form january 2001 through december 2006 on demographics, public assistance, food security, experience with heating/cooling and utilities, parents evaluation of developmental status, and child health. the household energy security indicator includes energy-secure, no energy problems; moderate energy insecurity, utility shutoff threatened in past year; and severe energy insecurity, heated with cooking stove, utility shutoff, or >or=1 day without heat/cooling in past year. the main outcome measures were household and child food security, child reported health status, parents evaluation of developmental status concerns, and hospitalizations. of 9721 children, 11% (n = 1043) and 23% (n = 2293) experienced moderate and severe energy insecurity, respectively. versus children with energy security, children with moderate energy insecurity had greater odds of household food insecurity, child food insecurity, hospitalization since birth, and caregiver report of child fair/poor health, adjusted for research site and mother, child, and household characteristics. children with severe energy insecurity had greater adjusted odds of household food insecurity, child food insecurity, caregivers reporting significant developmental concerns on the parents evaluation of developmental status scale, and report of child fair/poor health. no significant association was found between energy security and child weight for age or weight for length. as household energy insecurity increases, infants and toddlers experienced increased odds of household and child food insecurity and of reported poor health, hospitalizations, and developmental risks.

a high proportion of children in the united states are overweight, suffer from food insecurity, and live in households facing maternal stressors. the objective of this article was to identify the associations of food insecurity and maternal stressors with childhood overweight among low-income children. we hypothesized that maternal stressors may exacerbate the relationship between food insecurity and child obesity. the sample included 841 children (3-17 years old) and their mothers with incomes below 200% of the poverty line from the 1999-2002 national health and nutrition examination survey. food insecurity was based on us department of agriculture protocol, maternal stressors were assessed from survey questions, and bmi was used to classify weight status. probit regression models predicted the probability of a child being overweight or obese. in most specifications, there was no direct association between food insecurity or maternal stressors and overweight for children of any age. among 3- to 10-year-olds, the interaction of food insecurity and maternal stressors was significantly linked to the probability of being overweight; more specifically, an increase in maternal stressors amplified a food secure child's probability of being overweight or obese. this result is robust to alternative specifications. however, these results were not found among 11- and 17-year-old youth. younger children in food secure, low-income households in the united states who are experiencing higher levels of maternal stressors have a greater probability of being overweight than food insecure children. this finding was contrary to the hypothesis; 3 reasons for this are covered in the article. those who create policies that address childhood obesity could consider the benefits to low-income children's well-being resulting from reducing their mothers' stressors. because most children in the united states are food secure, these policies could have a profound impact on childhood overweight.

in this study, we evaluated the relationship between household food security status and developmental risk in young children, after controlling for potential confounding variables. the children's sentinel nutritional assessment program interviewed (in english, spanish, or somali) 2010 caregivers from low-income households with children 4 to 36 months of age, at 5 pediatric clinic/emergency department sites (in arkansas, massachusetts, maryland, minnesota, and pennsylvania). interviews included demographic questions, the us food security scale, and the parents' evaluations of developmental status. the target child from each household was weighed, and weight-for-age z score was calculated. overall, 21% of the children lived in food-insecure households and 14% were developmentally "at risk" in the parents' evaluations of developmental status assessment. in logistic analyses controlling for interview site, child variables (gender, age, low birth weight, weight-for-age z score, and history of previous hospitalizations), and caregiver variables (age, us birth, education, employment, and depressive symptoms), caregivers in food-insecure households were two thirds more likely than caregivers in food-secure households to report that their children were at developmental risk. controlling for established correlates of child development, 4- to 36-month-old children from low-income households with food insecurity are more likely than those from low-income households with food security to be at developmental risk. public policies that ameliorate household food insecurity also may improve early child development and later school readiness.

our goal was to test the hypothesis that breastfeeding is associated with enhanced infant-mother attachment and its antecedent maternal sensitivity. breastfeeding intent and practice were assessed by questionnaires administered to 152 mothers between 32 weeks of gestation and 12 months postpartum. early maternal sensitivity was measured by the sensitivity to cues subscale of the nursing child assessment satellite training feeding scale at 3 months, and quality of the mother-infant interaction was measured by the nursing child assessment satellite training feeding scale at 6 months. security of attachment was evaluated by the ainsworth strange situation at 12 months. a direct relationship between attachment security and breastfeeding practice was not identified. the quality of the mother-infant interaction at 6 months, rather than the type of feeding, predicted security of attachment. however, mothers who chose to breastfeed displayed greater sensitivity in dyadic interactions with their infants 3 months postnatally than those who chose to bottle feed, and intended breastfeeding duration prenatally correlated with sensitivity 3 months postpartum. although a path analysis failed to demonstrate contributions of early breastfeeding duration to either sensitivity or security, it did substantiate a significant path between prenatal breastfeeding intent and attachment security mediated by sensitivity. in addition, multivariate analyses revealed that early sensitivity among breastfeeding mothers was an independent predictor of the duration of any and exclusive breastfeeding during the first year. although the quality of the dyadic interaction in infancy, rather than feeding type, is predictive of attachment security, mothers who choose to breastfeed display enhanced sensitivity during early infancy that, in turn, may foster secure attachment. among breastfeeding mothers, higher sensitivity is associated with longer duration of breastfeeding during the first postpartum year. these findings suggest a link between attachment security and breastfeeding.

the prevalence of childhood overweight status is increasing. some have suggested that childhood overweight is associated with food insecurity, defined as limited or uncertain access to enough nutritious food. the purpose of this work was to assess the association of household and child food insecurity with childhood overweight status. the national health and nutrition examination survey 1999-2002 uses a stratified multistaged probability sample and collects a broad array of data from a nationally representative sample of us citizens. all children 3 to 17 years old in this sample are included in these analyses. we measured bmi categorized as at risk for overweight or greater (> or = 85%) or overweight (> or = 95%) and household and child food security/insecurity using the us food security scale. when compared with children from food-secure households, children from food-insecure households were more likely to demonstrate significant associations with being at risk for overweight or greater in the following demographic categories: 12 to 17 years, girls, white, and in households with income < 100% and > 4 times the federal poverty level. household food insecurity is associated with child overweight status in children aged 12 to 17, girls, and children who live in households with incomes > 4 times the federal poverty level. child food insecurity demonstrated the same associations with being at risk for overweight or greater, as did household food insecurity, but associations were also seen in 3- to 5-year-old children, boys, and mexican american children. child food insecurity is significantly associated with child overweight status for children aged 12 to 17, girls, white children, and children in families with income < or = 100% poverty level. controlling for ethnicity, gender, age, and family poverty index level, childhood food insecurity is associated with a child being at risk for overweight status or greater, but not overweight status. household and child food insecurity are associated with being at risk for overweight and overweight status among many demographic categories of children. child food insecurity is independently associated with being at risk for overweight status or greater while controlling for important demographic variables. future longitudinal research is required to determine whether food insecurity is causally related to child overweight status.

we sought to determine if the prevalence of depression and anxiety in mothers and the prevalence of behavior problems in preschool-aged children are more common when mothers report being food insecure. a cross-sectional survey of 2870 mothers of 3-year-old children was conducted in 2001-2003 in 18 large us cities. on the basis of the adult food-security scale calculated from the us household food security survey module, mothers were categorized into 3 levels: fully food secure, marginally food secure, and food insecure. the 12-month prevalence in mothers of a major depressive episode and generalized anxiety disorder was assessed by the composite international diagnostic interview-short form. a child behavior problem in > or = 1 of 3 domains (aggressive, anxious/depressed, or inattention/hyperactivity) was based on the child behavior checklist. seventy-one percent of the respondents were fully food secure, 17% were marginally food secure, and 12% were food insecure. after adjustment for sociodemographic factors plus maternal physical health, alcohol use, drug use, prenatal smoking, and prenatal physical domestic violence, the percentage of mothers with either major depressive episode or generalized anxiety disorder increased with increasing food insecurity: 16.9%, 21.0%, and 30.3% across the 3 levels. among children, after further adjustment for maternal major depressive episode and generalized anxiety disorder, the percentage with a behavior problem also increased with increasing food insecurity: 22.7%, 31.1%, and 36.7%. mental health problems in mothers and children are more common when mothers are food insecure, a stressor that can potentially be addressed by social policy.

to describe the development of a web-based multihospital pediatric asthma tracking system and present results from the initial 18-month implementation of patient tracking experience. the emergency department (ed) allies tracking system is a secure, password-protected data repository. use-case methodology served as the foundation for technical development, testing, and implementation. seventy-seven data elements addressing sociodemographics, wheezing history, quality of life, triggers, and ed managment were included for each subject visit. the ed allies partners comprised 1 academic pediatric ed and 5 community eds. subjects with a physician diagnosis of asthma who presented to the ed for acute respiratory complaints composed the asthma group; subjects lacking a physician diagnosis of asthma but presenting with wheezing composed the wheezing group. the tracking-system development and implementation process included identification of data elements, system database and use case development, and delineation of screen features, system users, reporting functions, and help screens. for the asthma group, 2005 subjects with physician-diagnosed asthma were enrolled between july 15, 2002 and january 14, 2004. these subjects accounted for 2978 visits; 10.4% had > or = 3 visits. persistent asthma was noted in 68% of the subjects. during the same time period, 1297 wheezing subjects with a total of 1628 ed visits (wheezing group) were entered into the tracking system. after enrollment, 57% of the subjects with > or = 1 subsequent ed visits received a physician diagnosis of asthma. our sophisticated tracking system facilitated data collection and identified key intervention opportunities for a diverse ed wheezing population. a significant asthma burden was identified with significant rates of hospitalization, acute care visits and persistent asthma in 68% of subjects. the surveillance component provided important insights into health care issues of both asthmatic subjects and wheezing subjects, many of whom subsequently were diagnosed with asthma.

recent work on the determinants of obesity has shown a positive association between household food insecurity and overweight status in adult women, yet research exploring this issue in children has been inconclusive. in this study we examine the association between food insecurity and overweight status in young school children by using a large, nationally representative sample. data from the early childhood longitudinal study-kindergarten cohort (ecls-k) were analyzed. replicate heights and weights were measured on kindergarten children (n = 16889) in the spring of 1999. children with a body mass index > or = 95th percentile of their gender-specific bmi-for-age chart were considered overweight. food-insecurity status was assessed by using the full 18-question us department of agriculture household food security scale. multivariate logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between overweight and food-insecurity status while controlling for potential demographic, socioeconomic, and behavioral confounders. overall, 11.2% of the girls and 11.8% of the boys were overweight. children from food-insecure households were 20% less likely to be overweight than their food-secure counterparts. similar results on the food-insecurity/overweight link were found across a range of different models and expressions for key variables. positive predictors of overweight status included low physical activity, television watching for > 2 hours/day, high birth weight, black or latino ethnicity, and low income. there are strong arguments for reducing food insecurity among households with young children. this research suggests that these arguments would be based on reasons other than a potential link to obesity. low activity levels and excessive television watching, however, were strongly related to overweight status, a finding that supports continued efforts to intervene in these areas.

medical errors cause significant morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients. specialty-based, voluntary reporting of medical errors by health care providers is an important strategy that may enhance patient safety. we developed a voluntary, anonymous, internet-based reporting system for medical errors in neonatal intensive care, evaluated its feasibility, and identified errors that affect high-risk neonates and their families. health professionals (n = 739) from 54 hospitals in the vermont oxford network received access to a secure internet site for anonymous reporting of errors, near-miss errors, and adverse events. reports used free-text entry in phase 1 (17 months) and a structured form in phase 2 (10 months). the number and types of reported events and factors that contributed to the events were measured. of 1230 reports--522 in phase 1 (17 months) and 708 in phase 2 (10 months)--the most frequent event categories were wrong medication, dose, schedule, or infusion rate (including nutritional agents and blood products; 47%); error in administration or method of using a treatment (14%); patient misidentification (11%); other system failure (9%); error or delay in diagnosis (7%); and error in the performance of an operation, procedure, or test (4%). the most frequent contributory factors were failure to follow policy or protocol (47%), inattention (27%), communications problem (22%), error in charting or documentation (13%), distraction (12%), inexperience (10%), labeling error (10%), and poor teamwork (9%). in 24 reports, family members assisted in discovery, contributed to the cause, or themselves were victims of the error. serious patient harm was reported in 2% and minor harm in 25% of phase 2 events. specialty-based, voluntary, anonymous internet reporting by health care professionals identified a broad range of medical errors in neonatal intensive care and promoted multidisciplinary collaborative learning. similar specialty-based systems have the potential to enhance patient safety in a variety of clinical settings.

premature infants who are discharged from intensive care nurseries are known to be at increased risk for apnea, bradycardia, and oxygen desaturation while in the upright position. these small infants also do not fit securely in standard infant car seats. because of these problems, the american academy of pediatrics recommends a period of observation in a car seat for all infants who are born at <37 weeks' gestation. it is not clear whether this recommendation should apply to the minimally preterm infants (born at 35-36 weeks' gestation) who are healthy at birth and are hospitalized in the normal newborn nursery. the objective of this study was to evaluate the respiratory stability and safety requirements of healthy, minimally preterm infants in car seats compared with term infants. fifty healthy, nonmonitored, preterm infants (mean gestational age: 35.8 +/- 0.6 weeks) and 50 term infants (mean gestational age: 39.5 +/- 1.4 weeks) were recruited from a level i newborn nursery in a community hospital. appropriateness of car seat fit was documented for each infant. heart rate, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry were evaluated while infants were supine and in their car seats. apneic and bradycardic events were recorded in addition to a continuous recording of oxygen saturation values. twenty-four percent of preterm and 4% of term newborn infants did not fit securely into suitable car seats despite the use of blanket rolls. mean oxygen saturation values declined significantly in both preterm and term infants from 97% in the supine position (range: 92%-100%) to 94% after 60 minutes in their car seats (range: 87%-100%). seven infants (3 preterm and 4 term) had oxygen saturation values of <90% for longer than 20 minutes in their car seats. twelve percent of the preterm infants (95% confidence interval: 4.5%-24.3%) but no term infants had apneic or bradycardic events in their car seats. our data support the current american academy of pediatrics recommendations that all infants who are born at <37 weeks' gestation, including those who are admitted to level i community hospitals, be observed for respiratory instability and secure fit in their car seats before hospital discharge. because lowering of oxygen saturation values was seen uniformly in all newborn infants, car seats should be used only for travel, and travel should be minimized during the first months of life.

infant and toddler aquatic programs provide an opportunity to introduce young children to the joy and risks of being in or around water. generally, children are not developmentally ready for swimming lessons until after their fourth birthday. aquatic programs for infants and toddlers have not been shown to decrease the risk of drowning, and parents should not feel secure that their child is safe in water or safe from drowning after participating in such programs. young children should receive constant, close supervision by an adult while in and around water.

to quantify pediatric injuries and deaths that result from toppled television sets. retrospective analysis of incident files compiled by the us consumer product safety commission (cpsc) data systems and the children's hospital of alabama (tcha) inpatient medical records. united states, january 1990-june 1997. tcha, may 1995-october 1997. morbidity or mortality as a result of a television set falling onto a child. over the 7-year period from january 1990 to june 1997, 73 cases that involved falling television sets were reported to the cpsc, including 28 deaths. the mean age of all victims was 36 months (sd +/- 25.4 months). the mean age of those who died was 31 months (sd +/- 22 months). females accounted for 42 incidents (58%) and 19 deaths (68%). the most common anatomic site of injury was the head, which accounted for 72% of cases investigated by cpsc personnel. of the 14 deaths further investigated by the cpsc, head injury was responsible for 13, with a generalized crushing injury accounting for the other. of the 45 cases in which data were available, dressers or stands were identified as the television support 76% of the time. the tcha database yielded five additional cases, including one death, with demographics similar to the cpsc data. serious injury and death can occur as a result of children toppling television sets from elevated locations in the home. the furniture on which a television set is situated is of fundamental importance. an estimate of overall risk to the population is impossible to determine from these data. in light of 73 reported cases with 28 deaths; however, injury prevention counseling and other strategies supporting in-home safety should include a secure and child-safe location for television sets. attention should be paid to safer design and placement of this ubiquitous product. television, wounds and injuries, accidents, human, infants, children.

this review examines the risk that passenger airbags pose for children and discusses behavioral and technologic measures aimed at protecting children from airbag deployment. although airbags reduce fatal crash injuries among adult drivers and passengers, this safety technology increases mortality risk among children younger than age 12. the magnitude of the risk is multiplied when children are unrestrained or restrained improperly. as new vehicles are resold to buyers who tend to be less safety-conscious than new car owners, the number of children endangered by passenger airbag deployment may increase. for vehicles already in the fleet, strong measures are required to secure children in the rear seat and increase the proper use of appropriate restraint systems through police enforcement of laws. one promising strategy is to amend child passenger safety laws to require that parents secure children in the rear seats. for future vehicles, a mandatory performance standard should be adopted that suppresses airbag deployment automatically if a child is located in the front passenger seat. other promising improvements in airbag design also are discussed. major changes in passenger airbag design must be evaluated in a broad analytical framework that considers the welfare of adults as well as children.

critically ill children often require endotracheal intubation before transport to a tertiary care center. correct endotracheal tube (ett) placement (trachea versus esophagus) and maintenance during transport are of the utmost importance. we evaluated a portable, qualitative, infrared end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor during transport of critically ill children. fifty patients, ages 1 day to 19 years (median, 1 year), weighing 1.6 to 70 kg (median, 10 kg) who were intubated and transported by ground ambulance (n = 25) or rotorcraft (n = 25) were enrolled. ett position was confirmed by physical examination, arterial blood gas or pulse oximetry, and sometimes by a chest radiograph. the instrument was attached, and readings were obtained before and during transport by transport nurses or respiratory therapists who also completed a brief questionnaire about the monitor. a moving bar indicator with a light-emitting diode display on the instrument indicates the presence of expired carbon dioxide. all three esophageal tube positions and 48 of 50 tracheal tube positions were correctly identified (sensitivity, 96%; specificity, 100%; positive predictive value, 100%; and negative predictive value, 60%). there were two false-negative results: in one case, there was instrument malfunction because of blood backing up into the tubing because of traumatic intubation, and in the second case, the patient had a chest tube that was leaking air. the device was evaluated as "too large" (30 of 50), "hard to secure" (25 of 50), and "not convenient" (29 of 50). tube kinking was a problem (n = 7) when used in small infants in isolettes. the instrument was considered helpful in assuring ett position when clinical evaluation was not possible because of noisy conditions. we conclude that this carbon dioxide monitor was useful during transport of critically ill children in confirming ett position. further improvements in this noninvasive technology might be helpful in making the device more practical for use during interhospital transport.

this study assessed the types, circumstances, frequency, and health consequences of trauma suffered by juvenile delinquents at a secure residential training school. a review of 369 medical records of 387 teenagers, aged 10 to 17 years, admitted to one such facility between 1978 and 1982 was made. of the 369 students, 191 students (52%) suffered 391 separate trauma incidents serious enough to require a health care provider's attention. circumstances surrounding the injuries included sports (36%), fights (20%), self-inflicted injuries (13%), suicide attempts (9%), incidents related to vocational studies (8%), and horseplay (3%). the most common types of injuries were musculoskeletal trauma, scratches, bruises and lacerations, and fractures. the usual sites of injury were the extremities, head, or neck. more than 50% of trauma incidents required a physician's attention initially or in follow-up; 28% of the injured were referred to an off-campus facility; 21% necessitated radiologic or laboratory studies; 4% required hospitalization; and one student died. the average trauma rate for teenagers in this setting was 1.2 injuries per person per year; the average rate of hospitalizations for trauma was 0.04 hospitalizations per person per year. these data call for further studies of trauma morbidity among adolescents in this and other settings and for innovative trauma prevention strategies.

partial nasal obstruction in preterm infants increases the airway resistance. in spite of this, nasal feeding tubes are often used, if only because oral tubes are difficult to secure. a palatal appliance has been devised that maintains the position of oroenteric feeding tube(s) and is not associated with local complications. in order to assess the effects of resiting feeding tubes, two related studies were carried out. the first study, a trial, included respiratory monitoring of 29 infants on the third and/or seventh day after either the appliance and oroenteric tubes had been inserted, or, in the control group, after the nasoenteric tubes had been passed. after seven days, the infants using the palatal appliance had significantly less periodic breathing, central apnea, and movement than the control group. the second study showed that the removal of feeding tubes that had been in situ for several days reduced apnea rates and produced a significant increase in transcutaneous po2.

it is estimated that there are 500,000 youngsters in detention in the united states per year. detention facilities offer a unique environment in which adolescents at high risk for medical problems can be identified and treated. a health care program within the secure juvenile detention facility for new york is described in order to demonstrate how an academic medical center can effect improvement in the health status of underserved, incarcerated youth while meeting professional educational objectives for health trainees. results of medical services are given for the past 11 years. medical problems were diagnosed in 46% of the 47,288 adolescents examined. the conditions were grouped into those related to the legal status of the youngsters, socioeconomic background, and/or the institutional setting. the interrelationship of medical conditions with legal, ethical, and youth advocacy issues were demonstrated. the setting affords on opportunity to train primary care physicians with special emphasis on issues such as the nature of the doctor-patient relationship, confidentiality, and patient advocacy, while providing a necessary service to medically disadvantaged adolescents.

