our aim in this observational study was to monitor continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) usage and outcomes in newborn wards at 26 government hospitals in malawi after the introduction of cpap as part of a quality-improvement initiative. cpap was implemented in 3 phases from 2013 through 2015. survival to discharge was analyzed for neonates treated with nasal oxygen and/or cpap with admission weights of 1 to 2.49 kg at 24 government hospitals with transfer rates <15%. this analysis includes neonates admitted with respiratory illness for 5.5 months before (621 neonates) and 15 months immediately after cpap implementation (1836 neonates). a follow-up data analysis was completed for neonates treated with cpap at all hospitals during an additional 11 months (194 neonates). on implementation of cpap, survival to discharge improved for all neonates admitted with respiratory distress (48.6% vs 54.5%; p = .012) and for those diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome (39.8% vs 48.3%; p = .042). there were no significant differences in outcomes for neonates treated with cpap during the implementation and follow-up periods. hypothermia on admission was pervasive and associated with poor outcomes. neonates with normal mean temperatures during cpap treatment experienced the highest survival rates (65.7% for all neonates treated with cpap and 60.0% for those diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome). a nurse-led cpap service can improve outcomes for neonates in respiratory distress in low-resource settings. however, the results show that real-world improvements in survival may be limited without access to comprehensive newborn care, especially for small and sick infants.

food insecurity and pediatric obesity affect young children. we examine how food insecurity relates to obesity, underweight, stunting, health, and development among children <4 years of age. caregivers of young children participated in a cross-sectional survey at medical centers in 5 us cities. inclusion criteria were age of <48 months. exclusion criteria were severely ill or injured and private health insurance. the household food security survey module defined 3 exposure groups: food secure, household food insecure and child food secure, and household food insecure and child food insecure. dependent measures were obesity (weight-age >90th percentile), underweight (weight-age <5th percentile), stunting (height/length-age <5th percentile), and caregiver-reported child health and developmental risk. multivariable logistic regression analyses, adjusted for demographic confounders, maternal bmi, and food assistance program participation examined relations between exposure groups and dependent variables, with age-stratification: 0 to 12, 13 to 24, 25 to 36, and 37 to 48 months of age. within this multiethnic sample (n = 28 184 children, 50% non-hispanic african american, 34% hispanic, 14% non-hispanic white), 27% were household food insecure. with 1 exception at 25 to 36 months, neither household nor child food insecurity were associated with obesity, underweight, or stunting, but both were associated with increased odds of fair or poor health and developmental risk at multiple ages. among children <4 years of age, food insecurity is associated with fair or poor health and developmental risk, not with anthropometry. findings support american academy of pediatrics recommendations for food insecurity screening and referrals to help families cope with economic hardships and associated stressors.

more than 21 million low-income children rely on free or reduced-price meals during the school year. the us department of agriculture summer food service program (sfsp) provides meals to children during the summer months, but these programs are underused. the emergency department (ed) of urban medical centers is 1 of the few establishments that children access during the summer months, and as such, it may be a prime point of entry for such programs. this advocacy case study describes the implementation and evaluation of situating an sfsp in the pediatric ed and explores the impact on participant intention to connect with community resources after the ed visit. in this 7-week pilot, we partnered with a community agency to provide free lunch to all children ages 2 to 18 during their ed visit at an urban, freestanding children's hospital. after patient rooming and clarification of nil per os status, boxed meals were delivered to patients and siblings along with information regarding the sfsp and how to access community program sites. parents completed a survey about the experience with the meal program in the ed, previous knowledge of the sfsp, and intention to use community sfsp sites in the future. this case study demonstrates that situating the sfsp in the acute-care clinical setting is acceptable and has strong potential to improve the historically poor connection between families and critical community resources. additionally, this project highlights the potential of community-clinical partnerships to improve family resources and enhance the reach of established programs.

juvenile polyposis syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by multiple hamartomatous polyps throughout the gastrointestinal tract. juvenile polyposis of infancy is a generalized severe form of juvenile polyposis syndrome associated with a poor prognosis. a 47-month-old female infant presented initially with gastrointestinal bleeding and protein-losing enteropathy at 4 months of age. at the age of 12 months, the condition worsened, requiring albumin infusions every 24 to 48 hours and red blood cell transfusions every 15 days. upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, colonoscopy, and small-bowel enteroscopy revealed diffuse polyposis that was treated with multiple endoscopic polypectomies. despite subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis, protein-losing enteropathy and bleeding persisted, requiring continued blood transfusions and albumin infusions. a chromosomal microarray revealed a single allele deletion in chromosome 10q23, involving both the pten and bmpr1a genes. loss of pten function is associated with an increased activation of the protein kinase b (akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) pathway involved in cell proliferation. treatment with sirolimus, an mtor inhibitor, was initiated with the aim of inhibiting polyp growth. soon after initiation of treatment with sirolimus, blood and albumin infusions were no longer needed and resulted in improved patient growth and quality of life. this case represents the first detailed report of successful drug therapy for life-threatening juvenile polyposis of infancy.

there are ∼443 000 children in child protective custody (ie, foster care) in the united states. children in protective custody have more medical, behavioral, and developmental problems that require health care services than the general population. these health problems are compounded by poor information exchange impeding care coordination. health care providers often do not know which of their patients are in protective custody and are not privy to the critical social history collected by child protective services, including placement history and maltreatment history. meanwhile, the custodial child protection agency and designated caregivers (ie, foster caregivers and kinship providers) often lack vital elements of the health history of children in their care, which can result in poor health care delivery such as medication lapses, immunization delay, and poor chronic disease management. in this case study, we address this critical component of health care delivery for a vulnerable population by describing a process of developing an information sharing system between health care and child welfare organizations in collaboration with child protection community partners. lessons learned include recommended steps for improved information sharing: (1) develop shared community vision, (2) determine shareable information components, (3) implement and analyze information sharing approaches, and (4) evaluate information sharing efforts. a successful example of advocating for improvement of information sharing for youth in protective custody is explored to highlight these steps. in collaboration with child protective services, pediatricians can improve information sharing to impact both health care delivery and child protection outcomes.

among extremely preterm infants, we evaluated whether bevacizumab therapy compared with surgery for retinopathy of prematurity (rop) is associated with adverse outcomes in early childhood. this study was a retrospective analysis of prospectively collected data on preterm (22-26 + 6/7 weeks' gestational age) infants admitted to the eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network centers who received bevacizumab or surgery exclusively for rop. the primary outcome was death or severe neurodevelopmental impairment (ndi) at 18 to 26 months' corrected age (bayley scales of infant and toddler development, third edition cognitive or motor composite score <70, gross motor functional classification scale level ≥2, bilateral blindness or hearing impairment). the cohort (n = 405; 214 [53%] boys; median [interquartile range] gestational age: 24.6 [23.9-25.3] weeks) included 181 (45%) infants who received bevacizumab and 224 (55%) who underwent rop surgery. infants treated with bevacizumab had a lower median (interquartile range) birth weight (640 [541-709] vs 660 [572.5-750] g; p = .02) and longer durations of conventional ventilation (35 [21-58] vs 33 [18-49] days; p = .04) and supplemental oxygen (112 [94-120] vs 105 [84.5-120] days; p = .01). death or severe ndi (adjusted odds ratio [aor] 1.42; 95% confidence interval [ci] 0.94 to 2.14) and severe ndi (aor 1.14; 95% ci 0.76 to 1.70) did not differ between groups. odds of death (aor 2.54 [95% ci 1.42 to 4.55]; p = .002), a cognitive score <85 (aor 1.78 [95% ci 1.09 to 2.91]; p = .02), and a gross motor functional classification scale level ≥2 (aor 1.73 [95% ci 1.04 to 2.88]; p = .04) were significantly higher with bevacizumab therapy. in this multicenter cohort of preterm infants, rop treatment modality was not associated with differences in death or ndi, but the bevacizumab group had higher mortality and poor cognitive outcomes in early childhood. these data reveal the need for a rigorous appraisal of rop therapy.

poor neighborhood conditions have established associations with poorer child health, but little is known about protective factors that mitigate the effects of difficult neighborhood conditions. in this study, we tested if positive family relationships can buffer youth who live in dangerous and/or disorderly neighborhoods from poor asthma outcomes. a total of 308 youths (aged 9-17) who were physician-diagnosed with asthma and referred from community pediatricians and/or family practitioners participated in this cross-sectional study. neighborhood conditions around families' home addresses were coded by using google street view images. family relationship quality was determined via youth interviews. clinical asthma outcomes (asthma symptoms, activity limitations, and forced expiratory volume in 1 second percentile), asthma management behaviors (family response to asthma symptoms and integration of asthma into daily life), and asthma-relevant immunologic processes (lymphocyte t helper 1 and t helper 2 cytokine production and sensitivity to glucocorticoid inhibition) were assessed via questionnaires, interviews, spirometry, and blood draws. significant interactions were found between neighborhood conditions and family relationship quality (β = 
asthma is a highly prevalent childhood chronic disease, with particularly high rates among poor and minority youth. psychosocial factors have been linked to asthma severity but remain poorly understood. this study examined (1) relationships between parent and child depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd) symptoms, family functioning, and child asthma control in a sample of urban minority youth with uncontrolled asthma and (2) family functioning as a pathway linking parent depression and asthma outcomes. data were drawn from the baseline cohort of a randomized trial testing community interventions for children aged 5 to 16 with uncontrolled asthma (n = 223; mean age = 9.37, sd = 3.02; 85.2% hispanic). asthma control was defined by using the asthma control test and childhood asthma control test, activity limitation, and previous-12-month asthma severity. psychosocial measures included parent and child depression and ptsd symptoms, family chaos, and parent social support. parent and child depression symptoms, but not ptsd, were associated with worse asthma control (β = -.20 [se = 0.06] and β = -.12 [se = -.03]; p < .001). family chaos corresponded to worse asthma control, even when controlling for parent and child depression (β = -.33; [se = 0.15]; p < .05), and was a mediator of the parent depression-asthma path. emotional triggers of asthma also mediated the parent depression-asthma relationship. findings highlight family chaos as a mechanism underlying the relationship between parent depression and child asthma control. addressing parent and child depression, family routines, and predictability may optimize asthma outcomes.

adolescent depression and attempted and completed suicide are increasing in the united states. because suicide is often impulsive, the means of self-harm are frequently items of convenience like medication. authors of a recent study compared tricyclic antidepressant overdose to bupropion overdose. fluoxetine and escitalopram are the only agents with food and drug administration approval for pediatric depression, but off-label bupropion prescriptions are common. we sought to compare the effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) and bupropion in overdose. this was an analysis of the national poison data system from june 2013 through december 2017 for adolescent (ages 10-19) exposures to ssris or bupropion coded as "suspected suicide." demographics, clinical effects, therapies, and medical outcome were analyzed. there were 30 026 cases during the study period. sertraline and fluoxetine accounted for nearly 60%, whereas bupropion was reported in 11.7%. bupropion exposure was significantly associated with death (0.23% vs 0%; p < .001) or serious outcome (58.1% vs 19%; p < .001) as well as the 10 most common clinical effects, including seizures (27.0% vs 8.5%; p < .001) and hallucinations (28.6% vs 4.3%; p < .001). bupropion exposure was significantly associated with the need for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (0.51% vs 0.01%; p < .001), intubation (4.9% vs 0.3%; p < .001), vasopressors (1.1% vs 0.2%; p < .001), and benzodiazepines (34.2% vs 5.5%; p < .001). there was a significant increase in all exposures and in proportion of serious outcomes over time. adolescents who attempt self-harm are at higher risk for serious morbidity and poor outcomes with bupropion than with ssris. these risks, and the patient's propensity for self-harm, should be evaluated when therapy with bupropion is considered.

high-quality evidence indicates that intervening with health care providers improves human papillomavirus (hpv) vaccine delivery. however, scaling up evidence-based strategies in real-world clinical practice remains challenging. we sought to improve the reach and impact of strategies for hpv vaccination quality improvement (qi) through local adaptation and implementation in a large, not-for-profit health care system. we conducted an hpv vaccination qi program using existing materials to support physician training coupled with assessment and feedback. local physicians with high hpv vaccination rates facilitated training, which included didactic instruction and video vignettes modeling effective communication. we randomly assigned 25 clinics with 77 physicians to the qi arm or the wait-list control arm. we used hierarchical linear models to assess hpv vaccination coverage (≥1 dose) over 6 months among patients aged 12 to 14. of 45 physicians in the qi arm, the program reached 43 (95%) with training plus assessment and feedback. in the overall sample, hpv vaccination coverage increased in both the qi and control arms (8.6 vs 6.4 percentage points, respectively), although the 2.2-percentage point difference did not reach statistical significance. sensitivity analyses that excluded physicians with poor data quality indicated a statistically significant advantage of 3.3 percentage points for qi versus control (b = 0.034; se = 0.015; p < .05). our locally adapted qi program achieved excellent reach, with small improvements in hpv vaccination coverage. future implementation research is needed to bolster program impact and support health systems in leveraging local resources to conduct these programs efficiently.

pregnancy, infancy, and toddlerhood are sensitive times in which families are particularly vulnerable to household food insecurity and when disparities in child obesity emerge. understanding obesity-promoting infant-feeding beliefs, styles, and practices in the context of food insecurity could better inform both food insecurity and child obesity prevention interventions and policy guidelines. we performed purposive sampling of low-income hispanic mothers (n = 100) with infants in the first 2 years of life, all of whom were participants in a randomized controlled trial of an early child obesity prevention intervention called the starting early program. bilingual english-spanish interviewers conducted semistructured qualitative interviews, which were audio recorded, transcribed, and translated. by using the constant comparative method, transcripts were coded through an iterative process of textual analysis until thematic saturation was reached. three key themes emerged: (1) contributors to financial strain included difficulty meeting basic needs, job instability, and high vulnerability specific to pregnancy, infancy, and immigration status; (2) effects on infant feeding included decreased breastfeeding due to perceived poor maternal diet, high stress, and limiting of healthy foods; and (3) coping strategies included both home- and community-level strategies. stakeholders in programs and policies to prevent poverty-related disparities in child obesity should consider and address the broader context by which food insecurity is associated with contributing beliefs, styles, and practices. potential strategies include addressing misconceptions about maternal diet and breast milk adequacy, stress management, building social support networks, and connecting to supplemental nutrition assistance programs.

our aim was to report the long-term clinical and imaging outcomes of ≤15-year-old children treated for ruptured or symptomatic cerebral aneurysms and to identify prognostic factors for clinical outcome, recurrence, and rebleeding. we retrospectively identified all pediatric cases of cerebral aneurysm from 2000 to 2015 and then prospectively evaluated long-term occlusion using brain mri and clinical outcome measures: outcome was considered favorable if king's outcome scale for childhood head injury score was ≥5. we performed univariate analysis and logistic binary regression to identify variables associated with clinical and imaging outcomes. fifty-one children (aged 8.5 ± 1.1 years [mean ± sd], with 37 ruptured and 14 symptomatic aneurysms) were included, and endovascular treatments (84%) or microsurgical procedures (16%) were performed. despite a 19.6% death rate, at a mean follow-up of 8.3 years, 35 children (68.6%) had a favorable outcome. annual bleeding and aneurysm recurrence rates were 1.4% ± 1.1% and 2.6% ± 1.8%, respectively. cerebral ischemia, whether initial or delayed within the first month, was predictive of poor clinical outcome in multivariate analysis (odds ratio: 25; 95% confidence interval: 0.43-143; p < .0001), whereas aneurysm size >5 mm was the only factor associated with recurrence (odds ratio: 14.6; 95% confidence interval: 2.4-86.1; p = .003). two-thirds of studied ≤15-year-old children suffering from ruptured or symptomatic cerebral aneurysms had long-term favorable outcome. annual bleeding and aneurysm recurrence rates have shown to be low after endovascular or surgical treatment. long-term imaging follow-up helps to depict aneurysm recurrence or de novo aneurysm formation and to prevent rebleeding.

a 21-month-old previously healthy girl presented to the emergency department initially with fever, rhinorrhea, and poor oral intake. she was subsequently discharged from the hospital on amoxicillin for treatment of acute otitis media but presented hours later on the same day with continued poor oral intake, decreased urine output, and lethargy. the patient was afebrile on examination without a focal source of infection or evidence of meningismus, but she was lethargic and minimally responsive to pain and had reduced strength in the upper and lower extremities. initial laboratory analysis revealed leukocytosis with a neutrophil predominance and bandemia, hyponatremia, mild hyperkalemia, hyperglycemia, elevated transaminases, a mild metabolic acidosis, glucosuria, ketonuria, and hematuria. follow-up tests, based on the history and results of the initial tests, were sent and led to a surprising diagnosis.

systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia) is an aggressive form of childhood arthritis accompanied by persistent systemic inflammation. patients with sjia often exhibit poor response to conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, and chronic glucocorticoid use is associated with significant adverse effects. although biologics used to target interleukin 1 and interleukin 6 are efficacious, the long-term commitment to frequent injections or infusions remains a challenge in young children. janus-activated kinase (jak) inhibitors block the signaling of numerous proinflammatory cytokines and are now used clinically for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in adults. whether this new class of medication is effective for sjia has not been reported. here, we describe the case of a 13-year-old girl with recalcitrant sjia characterized by polyarticular arthritis, fever, lymphadenopathy, and serological features of inflammation. she showed minimal response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, glucocorticoids, conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, and etanercept. she also developed osteoporosis and vertebral compression fracture as the result of chronic glucocorticoid therapy. oral therapy with the jak inhibitor tofacitinib was initiated, and the patient experienced steady improvement of both arthritis and systemic features. complete remission was achieved after 3 months, and no evidence of disease activity or adverse effects was seen through 6 months of follow-up. our experience reveals the effectiveness of jak inhibition in a case of refractory sjia. tofacitinib is an intriguing oral alternative to the available biologics for children with sjia, and its efficacy and safety should be further assessed by clinical trial.

more than 6.5 million children in the united states, approximately 13% of all students, miss 15 or more days of school each year. the rates of chronic absenteeism vary between states, communities, and schools, with significant disparities based on income, race, and ethnicity. chronic school absenteeism, starting as early as preschool and kindergarten, puts students at risk for poor school performance and school dropout, which in turn, put them at risk for unhealthy behaviors as adolescents and young adults as well as poor long-term health outcomes. pediatricians and their colleagues caring for children in the medical setting have opportunities at the individual patient and/or family, practice, and population levels to promote school attendance and reduce chronic absenteeism and resulting health disparities. although this policy statement is primarily focused on absenteeism related to students' physical and mental health, pediatricians may play a role in addressing absenteeism attributable to a wide range of factors through individual interactions with patients and their parents and through community-, state-, and federal-level advocacy.

to examine the association between parental disengagement in childhood and adolescent gun carrying and determine whether this association is accounted for by externalizing problems and affiliation with delinquent peers during early adolescence. the sample included 503 boys (55.7% african american, 40.6% white, 3.7% other) recruited from first-grade classrooms in pittsburgh public schools. multi-informant assessments were conducted regularly (semiannually then annually) from approximately ages 7.5 to 20 years. latent factors were constructed by using parent-reported parental disengagement (ie, poor parental involvement, poor parent-son communication, poor parent-son relationship quality) collected from ages 7.5 to 10 years, youth-reported peer delinquency from ages 10.5 to 13 years, and teacher-reported externalizing problems from ages 10.5 to 13 years. the outcome was youth-reported gun carrying from ages 14 to 20 years. twenty percent of individuals sampled reported carrying a gun during adolescence. childhood parental disengagement was significantly associated with adolescent gun carrying (β = .22; 95% confidence interval: 0.08 to 0.36). furthermore, the association between parental disengagement and gun carrying was partially mediated through peer delinquency and externalizing problems during early adolescence. the 2 indirect paths accounted for ∼29% of the total effect of parental disengagement. boys exposed to poorer parental engagement during childhood are more likely to affiliate with delinquent peers and exhibit externalizing problems during early adolescence, which (in turn) increases their risk of carrying a firearm in later adolescence. this suggests that gun violence prevention efforts with children should work to enhance aspects of parental engagement.

: media-1vid110.1542/5985300176001peds-va_2018-2303video abstract background: teen mothers often present with depression, social complexity, and inadequate parenting skills. many have rapid repeat pregnancy, which increases risk for poor outcomes. we conducted a randomized controlled trial of a parenting and life skills intervention for teen mothers aimed at impacting parenting and reproductive outcomes. teen mothers were recruited from a teen-tot clinic with integrated medical care and social services. participants were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive (1) teen-tot services plus 5 interactive parenting and life skills modules adapted from the nurturing and ansell-casey life skills curricula, delivered by a nurse and social worker over the infant's first 15 months or (2) teen-tot services alone. a computerized questionnaire was self-administered at intake, 12, 24, and 36 months. outcomes included maternal self-esteem, parenting attitudes associated with child maltreatment risk, maternal depression, life skills, and repeat pregnancy over a 36-month follow-up. we used generalized linear mixed modeling and logistic regression to examine intervention effects. of 152 invited, 140 (92%) participated (intervention = 72; control = 68). at 36 months, maternal self-esteem was higher in the intervention group compared with controls (p = .011), with higher scores on preparedness for mothering role (p = .011), acceptance of infant (p = .008), and expected relationship with infant (p = .029). repeat pregnancy by 36 months was significantly lower for intervention versus control participants. a brief parenting and/or life skills intervention paired with medical care for teens and their children has positive effects on maternal self-esteem and repeat pregnancy over 36 months.

perinatal depression is the most common obstetric complication in the united states, with prevalence rates of 15% to 20% among new mothers. untreated, it can adversly affect the well-being of children and families throught increasing the risk for costly complications during birth and lead to deterioration of core supports, including partner relationships and social networks. perinatal depression contributes to long-lasting, and even permanent, consequences for the physical and mental health of parents and children, including poor family functioning, increased risk of child abuse and neglect, delayed infant development, perinatal obstetric complications, challenges with breastfeeding, and costly increases in health care use. perinatal depression can interfere with early parent-infant interaction and attachment, leading to potentially long-term disturbances in the child's physical, emotional, cognitive, and social development. fortunately, perinatal depression is identifiable and treatable. the us preventive services task force, centers for medicare and medicaid services, and many professional organizations recommend routine universal screening for perinatal depression in women to facilitate early evidence-based treatment and referrals, if necessary. despite significant gains in screening rates from 2004 to 2013, a minority of pediatricians routinely screen for postpartum depression, and many mothers are still not identified or treated. pediatric primary care clinicians, with a core mission of promoting child and family health, are in an ideal position to implement routine postpartum depression screens at several well-child visits throughout infancy and to provide mental health support through referrals and/or the interdisciplinary services of a pediatric patient-centered medical home model.

this policy statement revises a previous statement on screening of preterm infants for retinopathy of prematurity (rop) that was published in 2013. rop is a pathologic process that occurs in immature retinal tissue and can progress to a tractional retinal detachment, which may then result in visual loss or blindness. for more than 3 decades, treatment of severe rop that markedly decreases the incidence of this poor visual outcome has been available. however, severe, treatment-requiring rop must be diagnosed in a timely fashion to be treated effectively. the sequential nature of rop requires that infants who are at-risk and preterm be examined at proper times and intervals to detect the changes of rop before they become destructive. this statement presents the attributes of an effective program to detect and treat rop, including the timing of initial and follow-up examinations.

hospital-to-home transitions are critical opportunities to promote patient safety and high-quality care. however, such transitions are often fraught with difficulties associated with increased health care use and poor patient satisfaction. in this review, we determine which pediatric hospital discharge interventions affect subsequent health care use or parental satisfaction compared with usual care. we searched 7 bibliographic databases and 5 pediatric journals. inclusion criteria were: (1) available in english, (2) focused on children <18 years of age, (3) pediatric data reported separately from adult data, (4) not focused on normal newborns or pregnancy, (5) discharge intervention implemented in the inpatient setting, and (6) outcomes of health care use or caregiver satisfaction. reviews, case studies, and commentaries were excluded. two reviewers independently abstracted data using modified cochrane data collection forms and assessed quality using modified downs and black checklists. seventy one articles met inclusion criteria. although most interventions improved satisfaction, interventions variably reduced use. interventions focused on follow-up care, discharge planning, teach back-based parental education, and contingency planning were associated with reduced use across patient groups. bundled care coordination and family engagement interventions were associated with lower use in patients with chronic illnesses and neonates. variability limited findings and reduced generalizability. in this review, we highlight the utility of a pediatric discharge bundle in reducing health care use. coordinating follow-up, discharge planning, teach back-based parental education, and contingency planning are potential foci for future efforts to improve hospital-to-home transitions.

advances in treatment and multidisciplinary management have resulted in improved survival of individuals with duchenne muscular dystrophy (dmd). updated dmd treatment recommendations as found in the 2018 dmd care considerations are aimed to assist multidisciplinary care teams in providing standardized care to their patients, including attention to nutritional and gastrointestinal health. challenges remain for care teams in accurately estimating height and nutritional status for individuals with dmd. it can be difficult for patients to maintain a healthy weight. risk factors for obesity include glucocorticoid therapy and loss of ambulation. in contrast, in the later stages of the disease, swallowing dysfunction can lead to poor nutrition and consideration for gastrostomy tube placement. constipation is highly prevalent, underrecognized, and undertreated in dmd. with this article, we address the assessment and management of gastrointestinal and nutritional issues, as well as clinical controversies.

: media-1vid110.1542/5804912861001peds-va_2017-4254video abstract objectives: prenatal homelessness is associated with elevated risks of adverse neonatal outcomes. how the timing and duration of homelessness during pregnancy and/or a child's early life relate to postnatal child health is unclear. we interviewed 20 571 low-income caregivers of children <4 years old in urban pediatric clinics and/or emergency departments in 5 us cities. categories of homelessness timing were prenatal, postnatal, both, or never; postnatal duration was >6 months or <6 months. after controlling for birth outcomes and other potential confounders, compared with never-homeless children, children who were homeless both pre- and postnatally were at the highest risk of the following: postneonatal hospitalizations (adjusted odds ratio [aor] 1.41; confidence interval [ci] 1.18-1.69), fair or poor child health (aor 1.97; ci 1.58-2.47), and developmental delays (aor 1.48; ci 1.16-1.89). there was no significant association with risk of underweight (aor 0.95; ci 0.76-1.18) or overweight status (aor 1.07; ci 0.84-1.37). children <1 year old with >6 months of homelessness versus those who were never homeless had high risks of fair or poor health (aor 3.13; ci 2.05-4.79); children 1 to 4 years old who were homeless for >6 months were at risk for fair or poor health (aor 1.89; ci 1.38-2.58). after controlling for birth outcomes, the stress of prenatal and postnatal homelessness was found to be associated with an increased risk of adverse pediatric health outcomes relative to those who were never homeless. interventions to stabilize young families as quickly as possible in adequate and affordable housing may result in improved pediatric health outcomes.

it is widely acceptable to involve parents in decision-making about the resuscitation of extremely preterm infants (epis) in the gray zone. however, there are different views about where the boundaries of the gray zone should lie. our aim in this study was to compare the resuscitation thresholds for epis between neonatologists in the united kingdom, sweden, and the netherlands. we distributed an online survey to consultant neonatologists and neonatal registrars and fellows that included clinical scenarios in which parents requested resuscitation or nonresuscitation. respondents were asked about the lowest gestational age and/or the worst prognosis at which they would provide resuscitation and the highest gestational age and/or the best prognosis at which they would withhold resuscitation. in additional scenarios, influence of the condition at birth or consideration of available health care resources was assessed. the survey was completed by 162 neonatologists (30% response rate). there was a significant difference between countries; the gray zone for most uk respondents was 23 + 0/7 to 23 + 6/7 or 24 weeks' gestation, compared with 22 + 0/7 to 22 + 6/7 or 23 weeks' gestation in sweden and 24 + 0/7 to 25 + 6/7 or 26 weeks' gestation in the netherlands. resuscitation thresholds were higher if an infant was born in poor condition. there was wide variation in the prognosis that warranted resuscitation or nonresuscitation. consideration of resource scarcity did not alter responses. in this survey, we found significant differences in approach to the resuscitation of epis, with a spectrum from most proactive (sweden) to least proactive (netherlands). most survey respondents indicated shifts in decision-making that were associated with particular weeks' gestation. despite the different approaches to decision-making in the 3 countries, there was relatively little difference between countries in neonatologists' prognostic thresholds for resuscitation.

the notion of moral exchangeability is scrutinized and its proper place in neonatal care is examined. on influential moral outlooks, the neonate is morally exchangeable. on these views, if the parents are prepared to let go of the neonate with a poor prognosis and opt instead for another child who is healthy, this may be the morally right thing for them to do, and neonatal care ought to ease their choice. the notion of moral exchangeability has a different place in different moral theories. three theories are examined: deontological ethics (insisting on the sanctity of innocent human life), according to which there is no place for the replacement of 1 child for another. it is different, however, with utilitarianism and in the moral rights theory based on self-ownership. according to utilitarianism, we are all replaceable. according to the moral rights theory, neonates are replaceable to the extent that they have not developed personhood. even a deontological ethicist of a kantian bent would concur here with the moral rights theory. because influential moral theories imply that the neonate is morally exchangeable, it is reasonable within neonatal care, as a general rule, to grant the parents a veto against any attempts to save a child with a poor prognosis. in particular, if the parents are prepared instead to have another, healthy child, this is to be recommended. however, this rule cannot be strict. in rare cases, it is necessary to yield to parents who insist that their neonate be saved despite a poor prognosis.

early risk stratification of infants with bronchiolitis receiving airway support is critical for focusing appropriate therapies, yet the tools to risk categorize this subpopulation do not exist. our objective was to identify predictors of "escalated care" in bronchiolitis. we hypothesized there would be a significant association between escalated care and predictors in the emergency department. we subsequently developed a risk score for escalated care. we conducted a retrospective cohort study of previously healthy infants aged <12 months with bronchiolitis. our primary outcome was escalated care (ie, hospitalization with high-flow nasal cannula, noninvasive or invasive ventilation, or intensive care admission). the predictors evaluated were age, prematurity, day of illness, poor feeding, dehydration, apnea, nasal flaring and/or grunting, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and retractions. of 2722 patients, 261 (9.6%) received escalated care. multivariable predictors of escalated care were oxygen saturation <90% (odds ratio [or]: 8.9 [95% confidence interval (ci) 5.1-15.7]), nasal flaring and/or grunting (or: 3.8 [95% ci 2.6-5.4]), apnea (or: 3.0 [95% ci 1.9-4.8]), retractions (or: 3.0 [95% ci 1.6-5.7]), age ≤2 months (or: 2.1 [95% ci 1.5-3.0]), dehydration (or 2.1 [95% ci 1.4-3.3]), and poor feeding (or: 1.9 [95% ci 1.3-2.7]). one of 217 (0.5%) infants without predictors received escalated care. the risk score ranged from 0 to 14 points, with the estimated risk of escalated care from 0.46% (0 points) to 96.9% (14 points). the area under the curve was 85%. we identified variables measured in the emergency department predictive of escalated care in bronchiolitis and derived a risk score to stratify risk of this outcome. this score may be used to aid management and disposition decisions.

young adults living with perinatally acquired hiv infection (phivyas) are at risk for poor biomedical and behavioral health outcomes. few studies offer a comprehensive overview of the functioning of this population in young adulthood and the role of hiv. data come from the child and adolescent self-awareness and health study, a longitudinal behavioral health cohort study of phivyas and perinatally hiv-exposed but uninfected young adults (pheuyas) who are compared on psychiatric and neurocognitive functioning, sexual and substance use behaviors, health and reproductive outcomes, and young adult milestones. overall, 27% of participants met criteria for a psychiatric disorder, including mood (11%), anxiety (22%), and substance use (28%), with no hiv status differences. phivyas performed worse on 2 neurocognitive tests. there were no hiv status differences in condomless sex (41%) or pregnancies (41% women; 38% men). both groups exhibited similar adult milestones: 67% graduated high school or an equivalent, 19% were in college, and 42% were employed. however, 38% were neither in school or working, 12% reported incarceration, and 16% were ever homeless. among phivyas, 36% were viremic (>200 copies per ml), and 15% were severely immunocompromised (cd4+ cell count <100 cells per mm3). many phivyas achieve adult milestones related to school, employment, sexual relationships, and starting families. however, they and pheuyas have high rates of psychiatric and substance use disorders and behavioral risks, which can jeopardize long-term health and adult functioning, particularly in the context of hiv. these findings underscore an urgent need to escalate interventions.

historically linked to sea voyagers in the 18th century, scurvy has become extremely rare during the last century in developed countries. however, it is still present in some at-risk populations and often overlooked in pediatric patients with restricted diets due to behavioral, neurodevelopmental, or psychiatric problems. so far, the only known etiology of developing scurvy is nutritional deficiency of vitamin c. in this report, we describe the case of a 3-year-old previously healthy swiss girl without any history of previous poor dietary intake, who presented a picture of systemic inflammation including persisting fever, palpable purpura located on the extensor sides of the extremities, refusal to bear weight, and gingival bleeding. blood tests revealed a significant increase of inflammatory markers and hypoalbuminemia. full-body mri revealed symmetrical bone marrow edema consistent with findings in previously reported cases of children with scurvy. after starting a high-dose oral vitamin c supplementation, the patient showed rapid clinical, laboratory, and radiologic improvement, but after stopping the treatment 4 months later, the patient developed relapse symptoms with pronounced fatigue, refusing to walk, and hair loss. these symptoms led us to restart the oral supplementation, which resulted in secondary normalization of her condition. the cause of her symptoms still remains unclear and presents the first case to our knowledge describing scurvy symptoms that are not directly linked to deficient dietary intake.

hypotension after pediatric traumatic brain injury (tbi) is associated with poor outcomes, but definitions of low systolic blood pressure (sbp) vary. age- and sex-specific, percentile-based definitions of hypotension may help to better identify children at risk for poor outcomes compared with traditional thresholds recommended in pediatric trauma care. using the national trauma data bank between 2007 and 2014, we conducted a retrospective cohort study of children with isolated severe tbi. we classified admission sbp into 5 percentile categories according to population-based values: (1) sbp less than the fifth percentile, (2) sbp in the fifth to 24th percentile, (3) sbp in the 25th to 74th percentile, (4) sbp in the 75th to 94th percentile, and (5) sbp ≥95th percentile. these definitions were compared with the american college of surgeons (acs) hypotension definition. the association between sbp percentiles and in-hospital mortality was analyzed by using multivariable poisson regression models. there were 10 473 children with severe tbi included in this study. there were 2388 (22.8%) patients who died while in the hospital. compared with sbp in the 75th to 94th percentile, mortality was higher with sbp less than the fifth percentile (relative risk [rr] 3.2; 95% confidence interval [ci] 2.9-3.6), sbp in the fifth to 24th percentile (rr 2.3; 95% ci 2.0-2.7), and sbp in the 25th to 74th percentile (rr 1.4; 95% ci 1.2-1.6). an increased risk of mortality with sbp <75th percentile was present across all age subgroups. sbp targets using the acs hypotension definition were higher than the fifth percentile hypotension definition, but were lower than the 75th percentile hypotension definition. admission sbp <75th percentile was associated with a higher risk of in-hospital mortality after isolated severe tbi in children. sbp targets based on the 75th percentile were higher compared with traditional acs targets. percentile-based sbp targets should be considered in defining hypotension in pediatric tbi.

to examine the nutritional quality of gluten-free (gf) products specifically marketed for children. all child-targeted food products were purchased from 2 major supermarket chains in calgary, alberta, canada. using the pan american health organization nutrient profile model, the nutritional quality of products with a gf claim was compared with those without such a claim. a secondary analysis further compared the nutrient profile of child-targeted gf products to their product "equivalents." overall, child-targeted gf products had lower levels of sodium, total fat, and saturated fat but also had less protein and a similar percentage of calories from sugar compared with child-targeted products without a gf claim. according to the pan american health organization criteria, both gf products and "regular" products designed for children can be classified as having poor nutritional quality (88% vs 97%; p < .001). when analyzed in light of their product equivalents without a gf claim, both had similarly high levels of sugar (79% vs 81%; p < .001). gf supermarket foods that are targeted at children are not nutritionally superior to regular child-targeted foods and may be of greater potential concern because of their sugar content. the health halo often attributed to the gf label is not warranted, and parents who substitute gf products for their product equivalents (assuming gf products to be healthier) are mistaken. parents of children with gluten intolerance and/or sensitivity, along with parents who purchase gf products for other health reasons, need to carefully assess product labels when making purchases.

fathers contribute to their children's health starting at the beginning of life. few parent education programs include fathers. among those that do, there is little effort to report program effects on father outcomes. in this systematic review, we examined father-inclusive perinatal parent education programs in the united states as they relate to a range of father outcomes. the databases searched were pubmed, cumulative index to nursing and allied health literature, embase, ovid medline, cochrane central register of controlled trials, and psycinfo. studies were included if they included an evaluation of a parent education program and a report of father outcomes measured within 1 year of the child's birth and were conducted within the united states. of 1353 total articles, 21 met study criteria. the overall state of the father-inclusive perinatal parent education program literature was poor, with few interventions available to fathers. available programs were associated with increased father involvement, coparenting relationship, partner relationship quality, father's mental health, and father's supportive behaviors. program effects on father-infant interaction, parenting knowledge, and attitudes and parenting self-efficacy were inconclusive. three programs emerged as best evidence-based interventions. risk of bias was high for many studies. outcome variability, small sample size, and publication bias contributed to the weak evidence base. there is a need for more evidence-based interventions to support fathers. clinicians play a key role in engaging fathers in early parent education programs and health care settings. prospero registration number: crd42017050099.

neonatal seizures represent a significant health burden on the term and preterm neonatal population and are linked to poor long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes. currently, there are no us food and drug administration-approved antiepileptic drugs for neonates, and authors of the medical literature have yet to reach a consensus on the most adequate approach to neonatal seizures. topiramate is readily used in the adult and older pediatric population for the management of migraines and partial-onset seizures. topiramate continues to gain favor among pediatric neurologists who often recommend this medication as a third-line treatment of neonatal seizures. we report our recent experience with 4 preterm neonates, born between 2015 and 2017, who developed radiographic signs of necrotizing enterocolitis after receiving topiramate for seizures. each was given oral topiramate for the treatment of electrographic and clinical seizures and developed the subsequent diagnosis of necrotizing enterocolitis, with abdominal distention, hemoccult-positive stools, and radiographic signs of intestinal distention and pneumatosis. more research regarding the risk factors of topiramate use in premature infants is needed.

parvovirus b19 (pb19) is an important human pathogen that results in a wide spectrum of clinical outcomes, from mild, self-limiting erythema infectiosum in immunocompetent children and arthralgia in adults to lethal cytopenia in immunocompromised patients and intrauterine fetal death. however, there have been few reports of pb19 infection in neonates or young infants (aged 28-90 days), and no previous reports contained descriptions of pb19 infection as a cause of sepsislike syndrome in this age group. we report a case of sepsislike syndrome caused by pb19 infection in a 56-day-old infant whose mother had polyarthralgia at the time of his admission. pb19 infection was diagnosed on the basis of positive polymerase chain reaction results for pb19 dna in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid. positive immunoglobulin m and negative immunoglobulin g for pb19 suggested acute infection. he was admitted to the icu because of poor peripheral circulation, but fully recovered without antibiotic administration. after excluding other possible pathogens, pb19 should be suspected as a cause of sepsislike syndrome in young infants, especially those who have close contact with pb19-infected individuals.

seizure freedom is the optimal response to antiepileptic treatment. in previous studies, it has been shown that between 61% and 71% of children with epilepsy achieve seizure freedom, whereas 7% to 20% have drug-resistant epilepsy. the definition of drug resistance has not been consistent across studies, and there is a lack of contemporary population-based data. we used data from a large nationwide child cohort to provide such information, implementing the current standard definition of drug resistance. the study was based on the norwegian mother and child cohort study. potential epilepsy cases were identified through registry linkages and parental questionnaires. medical record reviews and parental interviews were used to collect clinical information and to classify seizures, epilepsies, and etiologies. the cohort included 112 745 eligible children aged 3 to 13 years (median age 7 years) at end of follow-up. of these, 600 were epilepsy cases with at least 1 year of follow-up since epilepsy onset (median follow-up time: 5.8 years). there were 178 (30%) who had developed drug-resistant epilepsy, 353 (59%) who had been seizure free for ≥1 year, and 69 (12%) with intermediate seizure outcomes. having an identified cause of epilepsy (genetic, structural, metabolic, or infectious) was associated with unsatisfactory seizure outcome (48% drug resistance) and influenced the relative risk associated with other prognostic factors. sociodemographic characteristics were not associated with short-term seizure outcomes. drug resistance occurs in 3 out of 10 children with epilepsy, whereas 6 out of 10 become seizure free. having an identified cause of epilepsy is associated with poor response to treatment.

adverse childhood experiences (aces) robustly predict future morbidity and mortality. researchers are just beginning to investigate intergenerational effects. we hypothesize there are intergenerational associations between parent ace exposure and worse child health, health behaviors, and health care access and use. we linked data from 2 population-based cross-sectional telephone surveys in philadelphia, pennsylvania, that were used to ask parents about their past exposure to aces and their child's health, respectively. participants were 350 parent-child dyads. logistic regression models adjusted for parent and child characteristics. parent ace score was used to summarize indicators of parents' childhood adversity. child health outcomes were poor overall health status, asthma diagnosis, obesity, low fruit and vegetable consumption, any soda consumption, inadequate physical activity, excessive television watching, no health insurance, no usual source of health care, and no dental examination in past 12 months. of adult participants, 80% were female participants and 45% were non-latino african american. eighty-five percent of parents had experienced ≥1 ace and 18% had experienced ≥6 aces. in adjusted models, each additional parent ace was associated with higher odds of poor child overall health status (odds ratio [or] = 1.19; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.07-1.32), asthma (or = 1.17; 95% ci: 1.05-1.30), and excessive television watching (or = 1.16; 95% ci: 1.05-1.28). the full scope of the health effects of aces may not be limited to the exposed individual, highlighting the need for a 2-generation approach to addressing the social determinants of child health.

the earned income tax credit (eitc), refundable monies for america's working poor, is associated with improved child health. yet, 20% of eligible families do not receive it. we provided free tax preparation services in clinics serving low-income families and assessed use, financial impact, and accuracy. free tax preparation services ("streetcred") were available at 4 clinics in boston in 2016 and 2017. we surveyed a convenience sample of clients (n = 244) about experiences with streetcred and previous tax services and of nonparticipants (n = 100; 69% response rate) and clinic staff (n = 41; 48% response rate) about acceptability and feasibility. a total of 753 clients received $1 619 650 in federal tax refunds. streetcred was associated with significant improvement in tax filing rates. of surveyed clients, 21% were new filers, 47% were new users of free tax preparation, 14% reported new receipt of the eitc, and 21% reported new knowledge of the eitc. streetcred had high client acceptability; 96% would use streetcred again. families with children were significantly more likely to report streetcred made them feel more connected to their doctor (p = .02). clinic staff viewed the program favorably (97% approval). free tax services in urban clinics are a promising, feasible financial intervention to increase tax filing and refunds, save fees, and link clients to the eitc. with future studies, we will assess scalability and measure impact on health. streetcred offers an innovative approach to improving child health in primary care settings through a financial intervention.

in this study, we examine experiences of families of young adults (yas) on the autism spectrum to better understand dynamics leading to poor ya outcomes. twenty parents of yas with autism spectrum disorder (asd) who had completed high school in the past 15 years took part in a 90-minute interview. they described their ya's experiences at the transition from high school and current status with regards to services or postsecondary education. qualitative interviews were digitally recorded, transcribed, and analyzed by using the constant comparative method associated with a grounded theory approach. few adults with asd were receiving autism-specific assistance no matter their level of cognitive functioning. existing systems, such as service agencies and college disability support offices, had seldom been designed to meet their needs. some families gave up on services, some used self-directed services they had to manage themselves, and others paid out of pocket for services they could access no other way. inadequate services often led to ya failure and worsening of symptoms. the majority of families bore the financial and emotional brunt of finding or creating services and community experiences to meet their adult child's needs. parent narratives highlight the difficulties that are faced as families attempt to access appropriate services for yas on the autism spectrum at all levels of functioning. these insights can help pediatricians understand family concerns and develop anticipatory guidance strategies. more research is needed to identify potential solutions to challenges faced by specific subgroups of yas with asd.

individuals with autism spectrum disorder (asd) are reported to experience significant challenges during the transition to adulthood. although recent evidence indicates that individuals with asd experience poor outcomes in adulthood, little is understood about the contributing factors. in this qualitative study, we investigated the barriers to and needs in research and practice in the transition to adulthood among individuals with asd. thirteen researchers, including service providers, family members, and an individual with asd participated in 30- to 60-minute, semistructured, open-ended telephone interviews. interviews were transcribed, and data were analyzed by using an inductive approach to identify themes related to barriers to and needs in the transition to adulthood for youth with asd. stakeholders identified the need for transition planning and preparation to begin earlier and for systems to better accommodate the interests and varying abilities of individuals with asd. stakeholders also felt that parent and service provider expectations and perceptions influence early opportunities and experiences offered throughout the transition process. this study reveals the multilevel barriers to and needs in the transition to adulthood and the need for interagency and multidisciplinary collaboration and research to address the varying levels of needs, abilities, and multisector challenges.

malignant atrophic papulosis (map), also known as degos disease, is an extremely rare disease that is characterized by its unique skin presentation (namely, central, porcelain-white atrophic lesions with a telangiectatic rim). map has the following 2 variants: cutaneous map is manifested in the skin alone, whereas systemic map affects the gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, lungs, and other internal organs. some patients who presented with only cutaneous symptoms at first may develop systemic symptoms several years later. although the exact pathologic mechanisms are unclear, magro et al suggested in a recent study that map is a vascular injury syndrome that involves complement component c5b-9 complex deposition and high expression of interferon-α. the prognosis of systemic map is poor and typically fatal within a few years. nonetheless, because the c5b-9 complex is detected in map, some researchers have suggested combined treatment with eculizumab (a humanized monoclonal antibody against c5) and treprostinil (a prostacyclin analog). here, we report on a girl with systemic map who had severe central nervous system involvement and responded to eculizumab.

vitamin a is a fat-soluble micronutrient involved in the regulation of several physiologic functions, such as visual acuity, epithelial tissue integrity, immune response, and gene expression, thus playing a crucial role in childhood growth and development. although vitamin a deficiency (vad) in resource-limited settings is still an actual issue and represents the leading cause of preventable childhood blindness, its occurrence in high-income countries is rare, although possibly underdiagnosed because of its nonspecific early manifestations. a good awareness of vad symptoms and risk factors could aid its early diagnosis, which is fundamental to undertake a prompt treatment and to prevent ocular complications. nevertheless, the role of restrictive dietary habits, increasingly common in developed countries, is often overlooked in infants and children. we present a case of vad with permanent ocular sequelae in a 5-year-old girl from a high-income country. in the case described, vad ensued from a highly restricted diet, mainly limited to oat milk, which had been followed for more than 2 years. this child presented with ocular symptoms, opportunistic infection, anemia, poor growth, and a diffuse squamous metaplasia of the bladder; after commencing retinol supplementation, a gradual healing of clinical vad manifestations occurred, with the exception of the ocular sequelae, which resulted in irreversible visual loss.

young children in resource-poor settings remain inadequately immunized. we evaluated the role of compliance-linked incentives versus mobile phone messaging to improve childhood immunizations. children aged ≤24 months from a rural community in india were randomly assigned to either a control group or 1 of 2 study groups. a cloud-based, biometric-linked software platform was used for positive identification, record keeping for all groups, and delivery of automated mobile phone reminders with or without compliance-linked incentives (indian rupee rs30 or us dollar $0.50 of phone talk time) for the study groups. immunization coverage was analyzed by using multivariable poisson regression. between july 11, 2016, and july 20, 2017, 608 children were randomly assigned to the study groups. five hundred and forty-nine (90.3%) children fulfilled eligibility criteria, with a median age of 5 months; 51.4% were girls, 83.6% of their mothers had no schooling, and they were in the study for a median duration of 292 days. median immunization coverage at enrollment was 33% in all groups and increased to 41.7% (interquartile range [iqr]: 23.1%-69.2%), 40.1% (iqr: 30.8%-69.2%), and 50.0% (iqr: 30.8%-76.9%) by the end of the study in the control group, the group with mobile phone reminders, and the compliance-linked incentives group, respectively. the administration of compliance-linked incentives was independently associated with improvement in immunization coverage and a modest increase in timeliness of immunizations. compliance-linked incentives are an important intervention for improving the coverage and timeliness of immunizations in young children in resource-poor settings.

transgender and gender nonconforming (tgnc) adolescents have difficulty accessing and receiving health care compared with cisgender youth, yet research is limited by a reliance on small and nonrepresentative samples. this study's purpose was to examine mental and physical health characteristics and care utilization between youth who are tgnc and cisgender and across perceived gender expressions within the tgnc sample. data came from the 2016 minnesota student survey, which consisted of 80 929 students in ninth and 11th grade (n = 2168 tgnc, 2.7%). students self-reported gender identity, perceived gender expression, 4 health status measures, and 3 care utilization measures. chi-squares and multiple analysis of covariance tests (controlling for demographic covariates) were used to compare groups. we found that students who are tgnc reported significantly poorer health, lower rates of preventive health checkups, and more nurse office visits than cisgender youth. for example, 62.1% of youth who are tgnc reported their general health as poor, fair, or good versus very good or excellent, compared with 33.1% of cisgender youth (χ2 = 763.7, p < .001). among the tgnc sample, those whose gender presentation was perceived as very congruent with their birth-assigned sex were less likely to report poorer health and long-term mental health problems compared with those with other gender presentations. health care utilization differs between tgnc versus cisgender youth and across gender presentations within tgnc youth. with our results, we suggest that health care providers should screen for health risks and identify barriers to care for tgnc youth while promoting and bolstering wellness within this community.

poor families without health insurance present unique challenges for pediatricians who want to do what is best for the children who are their patients. families are often willing to make tremendous sacrifices to pay for recommended and needed medical care. physicians may have to decide whether, or how strongly to, recommend expensive treatments, especially when any good outcomes associated with such treatments are not guaranteed. how should we balance the considerations of justice and of the child's best interest with the grim realities facing poor families? in this article, we present a case from a tertiary care hospital in india in which doctors and parents struggled to figure out the best options for a young man with end stage renal disease.

studies characterizing hospitalizations in bronchiolitis did not identify patients receiving evidence-based supportive therapies (ebsts). we aimed to evaluate intersite and internetwork variation in receipt of ≥1 ebsts during the hospital management of infants diagnosed with bronchiolitis in 38 emergency departments of pediatric emergency research networks in canada, the united states, australia, new zealand, the united kingdom, ireland, spain, and portugal. we hypothesized that there would be significant variation, adjusted for patient characteristics. retrospective cohort study of previously healthy infants aged <12 months with bronchiolitis. our primary outcome was that hospitalization occurred with ebst (ie, parenteral fluids, oxygen, or airway support). out of 3725 participants, 1466 (39%) were hospitalized, and 1023 out of 1466 participants (69.8%) received ebst. the use of ebst varied by site (p < .001; range 6%-99%, median 23%), but not by network (p = .2). significant multivariable predictors and their odds ratios (ors) were as follows: age (0.9), oxygen saturation (1.3), apnea (3.4), dehydration (3.2), nasal flaring and/or grunting (2.4), poor feeding (2.1), chest retractions (1.9), and respiratory rate (1.2). the use of pharmacotherapy and radiography varied by network and site (p < .001), with respective intersite ranges 2% to 79% and 1.6% to 81%. compared with australia and new zealand, the multivariable or for the use of pharmacotherapy in spain and portugal was 22.7 (95% confidence interval [ci]: 4.5-111), use in canada was 11.5 (95% ci: 3.7-36), use in the united states was 6.8 (95% ci: 2.3-19.8), and use in the united kingdom was 1.4 (95% ci: 0.4-4.2). compared with united kingdom, or for radiography use in the united states was 4.9 (95% ci 2.0-12.2), use in canada was 4.9 (95% ci 1.9-12.6), use in spain and portugal was 2.4 (95% ci 0.6-9.8), and use in australia and new zealand was 1.8 (95% ci 0.7-4.7). more than 30% of infants hospitalized with bronchiolitis received no ebst. the hospital site was a source of variation in all study outcomes, and the network also predicted the use of pharmacotherapy and radiography.

an estimated 15 million neonates are born preterm annually. however, in low- and middle-income countries, the dating of pregnancy is frequently unreliable or unknown. to conduct a systematic literature review and meta-analysis to determine the diagnostic accuracy of neonatal assessments to estimate gestational age (ga). pubmed, embase, cochrane, web of science, popline, and world health organization library databases. studies of live-born infants in which researchers compared neonatal signs or assessments for ga estimation with a reference standard. two independent reviewers extracted data on study population, design, bias, reference standard, test methods, accuracy, agreement, validity, correlation, and interrater reliability. four thousand nine hundred and fifty-six studies were screened and 78 included. we identified 18 newborn assessments for ga estimation (ranging 4 to 23 signs). compared with ultrasound, the dubowitz score dated 95% of pregnancies within ±2.6 weeks (n = 7 studies), while the ballard score overestimated ga (0.4 weeks) and dated pregnancies within ±3.8 weeks (n = 9). compared with last menstrual period, the dubowitz score dated 95% of pregnancies within ± 2.9 weeks (n = 6 studies) and the ballard score, ±4.2 weeks (n = 5). assessments with fewer signs tended to be less accurate. a few studies showed a tendency for newborn assessments to overestimate ga in preterm infants and underestimate ga in growth-restricted infants. poor study quality and few studies with early ultrasound-based reference. efforts in low- and middle-income countries should focus on improving dating in pregnancy through ultrasound and improving validity in growth-restricted populations. where ultrasound is not possible, increased efforts are needed to develop simpler yet specific approaches for newborn assessment through new combinations of existing parameters, new signs, or technology.

antiglomerular basement membrane glomerulonephritis (anti-gbm gn) is a rare autoimmune disease that is characterized by rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis that may be associated with pulmonary hemorrhage. anti-gbm gn is caused by autoantibodies (classically type g immunoglobulin) directed against the α3 subunit of type iv collagen. without any appropriate treatment, the disease is generally fulminant, and patient and kidney survival is poor. the current guidelines recommend the use of plasma exchanges and immunosuppressive drugs. immunoadsorption (ia) can remove pathogenic iggs from the circulation and do not require plasma infusions, contrary to plasma exchanges. ia has seldom been used in adult patients with good tolerance and efficiency. we report herein the first pediatric case successfully treated with ia combined with immunosuppressive drugs in a 7-year-old girl who presented acute kidney injury (estimated glomerular filtration rate 38 ml/minute/1.73 m2). a kidney biopsy revealed numerous >80% glomerular crescents and linear igg deposits along the glomerular basement membrane. ten ia sessions led to rapid and sustained clearance of autoantibodies and improvement of kidney function until 21 months after onset (glomerular filtration rate 87 ml/minute/1.73 m2). no adverse effect was noted. this report adds to the growing body of evidence suggesting ia as a therapeutic alternative to plasma exchanges in anti-gbm gn. the other 27 published pediatric cases of anti-gbm gn are reviewed.

a previously healthy 3-week-old boy presented with 5 hours of marked fussiness, abdominal distention, and poor feeding. he was afebrile and well perfused. his examination was remarkable for localized abdominal tenderness and distention. he was referred to the emergency department in which an abdominal radiograph revealed gaseous distention of the bowel with a paucity of gas in the pelvis. complete blood cell count and urinalysis were unremarkable. his ongoing fussiness and abnormal physical examination prompted consultation with surgery and radiology. our combined efforts ultimately established an unexpected diagnosis.

risk-adjustment algorithms typically incorporate demographic and clinical variables to equalize compensation to insurers for enrollees who vary in expected cost, but including information about enrollees' socioeconomic background is controversial. we studied 1 182 847 continuously insured 0 to 19-year-olds using 2008-2012 blue cross blue shield of massachusetts and american community survey data. we characterized enrollees' socioeconomic background using the validated area-based socioeconomic measure and calculated annual plan payments using paid claims. we evaluated the relationship between annual plan payments and geocoded socioeconomic background using generalized estimating equations (γ distribution and log link). we expressed outcomes as the percentage difference in spending and utilization between enrollees with high and low socioeconomic backgrounds. geocoded socioeconomic background had a significant, positive association with annual plan payments after applying standard adjusters. every 1 sd increase in socioeconomic background was associated with a 7.8% (95% confidence interval, 7.2% to 8.3%; p < .001) increase in spending. high socioeconomic background enrollees used higher-priced outpatient and pharmacy services more frequently than their counterparts from low socioeconomic backgrounds (eg, 25% more outpatient encounters annually; 8% higher price per encounter; p < .001), which outweighed greater emergency department spending among low socioeconomic background enrollees. higher socioeconomic background is associated with greater levels of pediatric health care spending in commercially insured children. including socioeconomic information in risk-adjustment algorithms may address concerns about adverse selection from an economic perspective, but it would direct funds away from those caring for children and adolescents from lower socioeconomic backgrounds who are at greater risk of poor health.

adolescents with justice system involvement have high rates of physical and behavioral health disorders and are potentially high users of costly health care services. we examined emergency department (ed) and hospital use among a national sample of adolescents with various levels of justice involvement. cross-sectional analysis using the 2009 to 2014 national survey on drug use and health. we included adolescents aged 12 to 17 and used multivariable logistic and negative binomial regression models, adjusting for sociodemographic and health differences, to compare ed and hospital use among adolescents with and without justice involvement. our sample included 1375 adolescents with past year arrest, 2450 with past year probation or parole, 1324 with past year juvenile detention, and 97 976 without past year justice involvement. in adjusted analyses, adolescents with any justice system involvement, compared to those without, were more likely to have used the ed (38.5%-39.5% vs 31.0%; p < .001) or been hospitalized in the past 12 months (7.1%-8.8% vs 4.8%; p < .01). after adjustment, adolescents with justice involvement also had more ed visits per 100 person-years (77.7-92.9 vs 62.8; p < .01) and hospital nights per 100 person-years (43.3-53.7 vs 18.0; p < .01). use was highest among adolescents with justice involvement who reported fair or poor health, an illicit drug use disorder, or a mood disorder. adolescents with justice involvement had substantially higher rates of ed and hospital use. providing comprehensive support services to adolescents with justice involvement may improve health care use patterns and reduce health care spending.

impaired glucose control in very preterm infants is associated with increased morbidity, mortality, and poor neurologic outcome. strategies based on insulin titration have been unsuccessful in achieving euglycemia in absence of an increase in hypoglycemia and mortality. we sought to assess whether glucose administration guided by continuous glucose monitoring (cgm) is more effective than standard of care blood glucose monitoring in maintaining euglycemia in very preterm infants. fifty newborns ≤32 weeks' gestation or with birth weight ≤1500 g were randomly assigned (1:1) within 48-hours from birth to receive computer-guided glucose infusion rate (gir) with or without cgm. in the unblinded cgm group, the gir adjustments were driven by cgm and rate of glucose change, whereas in the blinded cgm group the gir was adjusted by using standard of care glucometer on the basis of blood glucose determinations. primary outcome was percentage of time spent in euglycemic range (72-144 mg/dl). secondary outcomes were percentage of time spent in mild (47-71 mg/dl) and severe (<47 mg/dl) hypoglycemia; percentage of time in mild (145-180 mg/dl) and severe (>180 mg/dl) hyperglycemia; and glucose variability. neonates in the unblinded cgm group had a greater percentage of time spent in euglycemic range (median, 84% vs 68%, p < .001) and decreased time spent in mild (p = .04) and severe (p = .007) hypoglycemia and in severe hyperglycemia (p = .04) compared with the blinded cgm group. use of cgm also decreased glycemic variability (sd: 21.6 ± 5.4 mg/dl vs 27 ± 7.2 mg/dl, p = .01; coefficient of variation: 22.8% ± 4.2% vs 27.9% ± 5.0%; p < .001). cgm-guided glucose titration can successfully increase the time spent in euglycemic range, reduce hypoglycemia, and minimize glycemic variability in preterm infants during the first week of life.

the authors of national guidelines emphasize the use of history and examination findings to diagnose community-acquired pneumonia (cap) in outpatient children. little is known about the interrater reliability of the physical examination in children with suspected cap. this was a prospective cohort study of children with suspected cap presenting to a pediatric emergency department from july 2013 to may 2016. children aged 3 months to 18 years with lower respiratory signs or symptoms who received a chest radiograph were included. we excluded children hospitalized ≤14 days before the study visit and those with a chronic medical condition or aspiration. two clinicians performed independent examinations and completed identical forms reporting examination findings. interrater reliability for each finding was reported by using fleiss' kappa (κ) for categorical variables and intraclass correlation coefficient (icc) for continuous variables. no examination finding had substantial agreement (κ/icc > 0.8). two findings (retractions, wheezing) had moderate to substantial agreement (κ/icc = 0.6-0.8). nine findings (abdominal pain, pleuritic pain, nasal flaring, skin color, overall impression, cool extremities, tachypnea, respiratory rate, and crackles/rales) had fair to moderate agreement (κ/icc = 0.4-0.6). eight findings (capillary refill time, cough, rhonchi, head bobbing, behavior, grunting, general appearance, and decreased breath sounds) had poor to fair reliability (κ/icc = 0-0.4). only 3 examination findings had acceptable agreement, with the lower 95% confidence limit >0.4: wheezing, retractions, and respiratory rate. in this study, we found fair to moderate reliability of many findings used to diagnose cap. only 3 findings had acceptable levels of reliability. these findings must be considered in the clinical management and research of pediatric cap.

nearly 20% of nurses leave their first job within a year of being hired. many do so because they perceive the work environment to be unhealthy or nonsupportive. nurse turnover is costly. when new nurses leave within 3 years of being hired, it costs the hospital $64 000, over and above salaries, to replace them. one of the hallmarks of an unhealthy work environment is poor communication between doctors and nurses. we present a case in which a nurse advocates for a young mother by questioning the doctor. she is reprimanded for doing so. we then asked 3 nurses to discuss the implications of such interactions for nurse satisfaction, patient safety, and a healthy work environment.

looked-after children in local authority care are among the most disadvantaged, and measures of their well-being, including educational outcomes, are poorer than other children's. the study sample consisted of all children in england born in academic years 1993 to 1994 through 1997 to 1998 who were in local authority care at any point during the academic years 2005 to 2006 through 2012 to 2013 and for whom results of national tests in literacy and numeracy were available at ages 7, 11, and 16 (n = 47 500). group trajectory analysis of children's educational progress identified 5 trajectory groups: low achievement, late improvement, late decline, predominant, and high achievement. being looked after earlier was associated with a higher probability of following a high achievement trajectory and a lower probability of following a late decline trajectory. for children first looked after between ages 7 and 16, having a longer total time looked after by age 16 was associated with a higher probability of following a high achievement trajectory. for children with poor outcomes at ages 7 and 11, being looked after by age 16 was associated with an increased chance of educational improvement by age 16. this study provides evidence that early entry into care can reduce the risk of poor educational outcomes. it also establishes group trajectory analysis as an effective method for analyzing the educational progress of looked-after children, with the particular strength that it allows factors associated with a late decline or improvement in educational progress to be identified.

to evaluate the association between head growth (hg) during neonatal and postdischarge periods and neurodevelopmental outcomes of preterm neonates of <29 weeks gestational age. we conducted a retrospective cohort study of infants <29 weeks gestational age admitted between 2009 and 2011 to participating canadian neonatal network units and followed by canadian neonatal follow-up network clinics. differences in head circumference (δhc) z score were calculated for 3 time periods, which include admission to discharge, discharge to follow-up at 16-36 months, and admission to follow-up. these were categorized in 1 reference group (δhc z score between -1 and +1) and 4 study groups (δhc z score of +2). neurodevelopmental outcomes were compared with the reference group. 1973 infants met the inclusion criteria. poor hg occurred frequently during the nicu admission (δhc z score 

growth problems are reported in patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia during the first years of life. however, it is unknown if poor growth persists during childhood. we therefore evaluated growth of patients longitudinally until 12 years of age. this prospective study included 172 patients (43 treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [ecmo]) born from 1999 to 2014. z scores of height-for-age (hfa), weight-for-height, and distance-to-target height were calculated at 6 months of age and at 1, 2, 5, 8, and 12 years of age. data were analyzed by using general linear models. at 1 year of age, the mean weight-for-height z score had declined in ecmo (-1.30, 95% confidence interval: -1.62 to -0.97) and non-ecmo patients (-0.72, 95% confidence interval: -0.91 to -0.54; p < .05). thereafter in ecmo patients, the mean hfa z score deteriorated between 1 (-0.43, 95% confidence interval: -0.73 to -0.13) and 5 years of age (-1.08, 95% confidence interval: -1.38 to -0.78; p < .01). in non-ecmo patients, the mean hfa z score deteriorated between 2 (-0.35, 95% confidence interval: -0.53 to -0.17) and 5 years of age (-0.56, 95% confidence interval: -0.75 to -0.37; p = .002). at 12 years of age, the mean hfa z score was still less than the norm in both groups: ecmo (-0.67, 95% confidence interval: -1.01 to -0.33) versus non-ecmo (-0.49, 95% confidence interval: -0.77 to -0.20; p < .01). adjusting for target height improved the mean height z scores but did not bring them to normal range. poor linear growth persisted at 12 years of age. the pattern of early deterioration of weight gain followed by a decline in linear growth is suggestive of inadequate nutrition during infancy. therefore, nutritional assessment and intervention should be started early and should be continued during childhood.

neuromotor impairments are common after pediatric stroke, but little is known about functional motor outcomes. we evaluated motor function and how it changed over the first 12 months after diagnosis. we also examined differences in outcome according to age at diagnosis and whether fine motor (fm) or gross motor (gm) function at 12 months was associated with adaptive behavior. this prospective, longitudinal study recruited children (n = 64) from the royal children's hospital, melbourne who were diagnosed with acute arterial ischemic stroke (ais) between december 2007 and november 2013. motor assessments were completed at 3 time points after the diagnosis of ais (1, 6, and 12 months). children were grouped as follows: neonates (n = 27), preschool-aged (n = 19), and school-aged (n = 18). a larger lesion size was associated with poorer gm outcomes at 12 months (p = .016). neonatal ais was associated with better fm and gm function initially but with a reduction in z scores over time. for the preschool- and school-aged groups, fm remained relatively stable over time. for gm outcomes, the preschool- and the school-aged age groups displayed similar profiles, with gradual recovery over time. overall, poor fm and gm outcomes at 12 months were associated with poorer adaptive behavior scores. motor outcomes and the trajectory of recovery post-ais differed according to a child's age at stroke onset. these findings indicate that an individualized approach to surveillance and intervention may be needed that is informed in part by age at diagnosis.

the pathogens that cause bacterial meningitis in infants and their antimicrobial susceptibilities may have changed in this era of increasing antimicrobial resistance, use of conjugated vaccines, and maternal antibiotic prophylaxis for group b streptococcus (gbs). the objective was to determine the optimal empirical antibiotics for bacterial meningitis in early infancy. this was a cohort study of infants <90 days of age with bacterial meningitis at 7 pediatric tertiary care hospitals across canada in 2013 and 2014. there were 113 patients diagnosed with proven meningitis (n = 63) or suspected meningitis (n = 50) presented at median 19 days of age, with 63 patients (56%) presenting a diagnosis from home. predominant pathogens were escherichia coli (n = 37; 33%) and gbs (n = 35; 31%). two of 15 patients presenting meningitis on day 0 to 6 had isolates resistant to both ampicillin and gentamicin (e coli and haemophilus influenzae type b). six of 60 infants presenting a diagnosis of meningitis from home from day 7 to 90 had isolates, for which cefotaxime would be a poor choice (listeria monocytogenes [n = 3], enterobacter cloacae, cronobacter sakazakii, and pseudomonas stutzeri). sequelae were documented in 84 infants (74%), including 8 deaths (7%). e coli and gbs remain the most common causes of bacterial meningitis in the first 90 days of life. for empirical therapy of suspected bacterial meningitis, one should consider a third-generation cephalosporin (plus ampicillin for at least the first month), potentially substituting a carbapenem for the cephalosporin if there is evidence for gram-negative meningitis.

there is broad agreement that increasing the cost-effectiveness and quality of health care services, thereby achieving greater value, is imperative given this country's current spiraling costs and poor health outcomes. however, how individuals or stakeholder groups define value may differ significantly. discussion of value in the context of health care, in particular value-based purchasing and value-based insurance design, must acknowledge that there is no universal consensus definition as to what constitutes value. to date, the consumer perspective has been underrepresented in discussions of value-based strategies such as pay for performance, capitated and bundled payments, and high-deductible health plans, which have been driven primarily by payers and providers. this article will discuss 3 elements of value from the perspective of families of children and youth with special health care needs: the role of families in the delivery of care, consumer perspectives on what constitutes quality for children and youth with special health care needs, and health care and health care financing literacy, decision-making, and costs. the undervalued contributions made by family members in the delivery and oversight of pediatric care and the importance of partnering with them to achieve the goals of the triple aim are stressed. the article closes with a discussion of recommendations for a future policy and research agenda related to advancing the integration of the consumer perspective into value-based purchasing and value-based insurance design.

opioid use and abuse have increased dramatically in recent years, particularly among women. we conducted a systematic review to evaluate the association between prenatal opioid use and congenital malformations. we searched medline and embase for studies published from 1946 to 2016 and reviewed reference lists to identify additional relevant studies. we included studies that were full-text journal articles and reported the results of original epidemiologic research on prenatal opioid exposure and congenital malformations. we assessed study eligibility in multiple phases using a standardized, duplicate review process. data on study characteristics, opioid exposure, timing of exposure during pregnancy, congenital malformations (collectively or as individual subtypes), length of follow-up, and main findings were extracted from eligible studies. of the 68 studies that met our inclusion criteria, 46 had an unexposed comparison group; of those, 30 performed statistical tests to measure associations between maternal opioid use during pregnancy and congenital malformations. seventeen of these (10 of 12 case-control and 7 of 18 cohort studies) documented statistically significant positive associations. among the case-control studies, associations with oral clefts and ventricular septal defects/atrial septal defects were the most frequently reported specific malformations. among the cohort studies, clubfoot was the most frequently reported specific malformation. variabilities in study design, poor study quality, and weaknesses with outcome and exposure measurement. uncertainty remains regarding the teratogenicity of opioids; a careful assessment of risks and benefits is warranted when considering opioid treatment for women of reproductive age.

early pubertal timing is linked with a range of adverse health outcomes later. given recent trends of earlier pubertal maturation, there is growing interest in the factors influencing pubertal timing. socioeconomic disadvantage has been previously linked with reproductive strategies later in life. in this study, we aim to determine the association between cumulative social disadvantages in early life and early puberty in a population-based birth cohort. data are from the b (baby) cohort of the longitudinal study of australian children. children (n  =  5107) were aged 0 to 1 years when recruited in 2004 and 10 to 11 years (n  =  3764) at wave 6 in 2015. household socioeconomic position (sep) and neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage were collected at all 6 waves. trajectories of disadvantage were identified through latent class models. early puberty at wave 6 was assessed from parental reports using an adaptation of the pubertal development scale. cumulative exposure to extremely unfavorable household sep in boys independently predicted a fourfold increase (odds ratio = 4.22, 95% confidence interval 2.27-7.86) in the rate of early puberty. in girls, the increase was twofold (odds ratio = 1.96, 95% confidence interval 1.08-3.56). we found no effect from neighborhood disadvantage once family sep was taken into account. cumulative exposure to household socioeconomic disadvantage in early life predicts earlier pubertal timing in both boys and girls. this may represent 1 mechanism underpinning associations between early life disadvantage and poor health in later life.

we estimated racial/ethnic differences in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) care quality and treatment continuity among medicaid-enrolled children. using medicaid data from 9 states (2008 to 2011), we identified 172 322 youth (age 6 to 12) initiating adhd medication. outcome measures included: (1) adequate follow-up care in the (a) initiation and (b) continuation and maintenance (c&m) treatment phases; (2) combined treatment with medication and psychotherapy (versus medication alone); (3) medication discontinuation; and (4) treatment disengagement (ie, discontinued medication and received no psychotherapy). logistic regressions controlled for confounding measures. among those initiating medication, three-fifths received adequate follow-up care in the initiation and c&m phases, and under two-fifths received combined treatment. compared with whites, african american youth were less likely to receive adequate follow-up in either phase (p < .05), whereas hispanic youth were more likely to receive adequate follow-up in the c&m phase (p < .001). african american and hispanic youth were more likely than whites to receive combined treatment (p < .05). over three-fifths discontinued medication, and over four-tenths disengaged from treatment. compared with whites, african american and hispanic children were 22.4% and 16.7% points more likely to discontinue medication, and 13.1% and 9.4% points more likely to disengage from treatment, respectively (p < .001). care quality for medicaid-enrolled youth initiating adhd medication is poor, and racial/ethnic differences in these measures are mixed. the most important disparities occur in the higher rates of medication discontinuation among minorities, which translate into higher rates of treatment disengagement because most youth discontinuing medication receive no psychotherapy.

the rapid pace of fetal development by far exceeds any other stage of the life span, and thus, environmental influences can profoundly alter the developmental course. stress during the prenatal period, including malnutrition and inflammation, impact maternal and fetal neurodevelopment with long-term consequences for physical and mental health of both the mother and her child. one primary consequence of maternal malnutrition, inflammation, and other sources of prenatal stress is a poor birth outcome, such as prematurity or growth restriction. these phenotypes are often used as indications of prenatal adversity. in fact, the original evidence supporting the fetal programming hypothesis came from studies documenting an association between birth phenotype and the development of subsequent physical and mental health problems. fetal growth restriction in both term and preterm infants is associated with neonatal morbidities and a wide variety of behavioral and psychological diagnoses in childhood and adolescence, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, anxiety, depression, internalizing and thought problems, poor social skills, and autism spectrum disorder. improving maternal-child health requires interventions that begin before pregnancy and continue throughout gestation and into the postpartum period. such interventions might include supporting pregnancy intention, maternal nutrition, health/medical care, mental health, and providing social support. this article discusses the impact of maternal nutrition and inflammation during preconception and pregnancy among women living in low-resource settings, with an emphasis on key knowledge gaps that need to be addressed to guide program and policy decisions at local, regional and global levels.

short courses of oral corticosteroid (ocs) medication are recommended for treatment of moderate to severe asthma exacerbations. concern has been raised about ocs overuse. our objective is to describe rates of ocs dispensing among children with asthma and factors associated with variation in ocs dispensing. claims data for children 1 to <18 years of age with an asthma diagnosis between january 2011 and january 2016 were extracted from the computerized databases of texas children's health plan. in the years 2011 to 2015, 17.1% to 21.8% of children had an asthma diagnosis. in each of these years 42.1% to 44.2% of these children had ≥1 ocs dispensing. ocs dispensing rates were higher for the children 1 to 4 years of age compared with older children. repeated ocs dispensing was common, and was most common for children 1 to 4 years of age. most children with an ocs dispensing (81%-83%) did not have other utilization suggesting poor asthma control (excessive β-agonist refills, emergency department visit, or hospitalization for asthma). ocss were less commonly prescribed to patients whose primary care provider was a board-certified pediatrician compared with other types of primary care providers. there was large variation in ocs prescribing rates among pediatricians (15%-86%). there were minimal differences in asthma emergency department visits and no differences in hospitalization rates by the pediatrician's ocs dispensing rate quartile. the patterns of dispensing observed suggest substantial overprescribing of ocs for children with an asthma diagnosis.

childhood adversity is highly prevalent and associated with risk for poor health outcomes in childhood and throughout the life course. empirical literature on resilience over the past 40 years has identified protective factors for traumatized children that improve health outcomes. despite these empirical investigations of resilience, there is limited integration of these findings into proactive strategies to mitigate the impact of adverse childhood experiences. we review the state of resilience research, with a focus on recent work, as it pertains to protecting children from the health impacts of early adversity. we identify and document evidence for 5 modifiable resilience factors to improve children's long- and short-term health outcomes, including fostering positive appraisal styles in children and bolstering executive function, improving parenting, supporting maternal mental health, teaching parents the importance of good self-care skills and consistent household routines, and offering anticipatory guidance about the impact of trauma on children. we conclude with 10 recommendations for pediatric practitioners to leverage the identified modifiable resilience factors to help children withstand, adapt to, and recover from adversity. taken together, these recommendations constitute a blueprint for a trauma-informed medical home. building resilience in pediatric patients offers an opportunity to improve the health and well-being of the next generation, enhance national productivity, and reduce spending on health care for chronic diseases.

streptococcus pneumoniae is a leading cause of mortality before age 5, but few studies examine details of childhood response to pneumococcal vaccine in less-developed settings. although malnutrition, hiv, and concurrent infections can impair response, evidence suggests that chronic parasitic infections can also contribute to poor vaccination results. the objective of this study was to determine whether response to pneumococcal vaccine varied among children either exposed to parasitic infections in utero, previously infected in infancy, or infected at the time of immunization. children from a 2006 to 2010 maternal-infant cohort were eligible for the current study. children were screened for malaria, schistosomiasis, filariasis, intestinal helminths, and protozoa. data on in utero exposure and early life infections were linked, and baseline antipneumococcal immunoglobulin g levels and nasopharyngeal carrier status were determined. participants received decavalent pneumococcal vaccine, and 4 weeks later, serology was repeated to assess vaccine response. a total of 281 children were included. preimmunity was associated with greater postvaccination increments in anti-pneumococcal polysaccharide immunoglobulin g, especially serotypes 4, 7, 9, 18c, and 19. present-day growth stunting was independently associated with weaker responses to 1, 4, 6b, 7, 9v, and 19. previous exposure to trichuris was associated with stronger responses to 1, 5, 6b, 7, 18c, and 23, but other parasite exposures were not consistently associated with response. in our cohort, hyporesponsiveness to pneumococcal conjugate vaccine was associated with growth stunting but not parasite exposure. parasite-related vaccine response deficits identified before age 3 do not persist into later childhood.

for asthma, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd), and autism spectrum disorder (asd), the objectives were to (1) describe the percent increases in prevalence and comorbidity and how these vary by poverty status, and (2) examine the extent to which poverty status is a predictor of higher than average comorbid conditions. secondary analyses of the national survey of children's health for years 2003, 2007, and 2011-2012 were conducted to identify trends in parent reported lifetime prevalence and comorbidity among children with asthma, adhd, and asd and examine variation by sociodemographic characteristics, poverty status, and insurance coverage. using 2011-2012 data, multivariable regression was used to examine whether poverty status predicted higher than average comorbid conditions after adjusting for other sociodemographic characteristics. parent-reported lifetime prevalence of asthma and adhd rose 18% and 44%, respectively, whereas the lifetime prevalence of asd rose almost 400% (from 0.5% to 2%). for asthma, the rise was most prominent among the poor at 25.8%. for adhd, the percent change by poverty status was similar (<100% federal poverty level [fpl]: 43.20%, 100% to 199% fpl: 52.38%, 200% to 399% fpl: 43.67%), although rise in asd was associated with being nonpoor (200% to 399% fpl: 43.6%, ≥400% fpl: 36.0%). publicly insured children with asthma, adhd, and asd also had significantly higher odds (1.9×, 1.6×, 3.0×, respectively) of having higher than average comorbidities. poverty status differentially influenced parent-reported lifetime prevalence and comorbidities of these target disorders. future research is needed to examine parent and system-level characteristics that may further explain poverty's variable impact.

we examined chronic conditions, functional limitations, and special health care needs in extremely preterm children (ept; 23-25 weeks' gestation) born between 1992 and 1998 at 2 swedish tertiary care centers that offered regional and active perinatal care to all live-born ept infants. of 134 surviving ept children, 132 (98%) were assessed at 10 to 15 years of age alongside 103 term-born controls. identification of children with functional limitations and special health care needs was based on a questionnaire administered to parents. categorization of medical diagnoses and developmental disabilities was based on child examinations, medical record reviews, and parent questionnaires. in logistic regression analyses adjusting for social risk factors and sex, the ept children had significantly more chronic conditions than the term-born controls, including functional limitations (64% vs 6%; odds ratio [or], 15; 95% confidence interval [ci], 6.1-37.2; p < .001), compensatory dependency needs (60% vs 29%; or, 3.8; 95% ci, 2.2-6.6; p < .001), and services above those routinely required by children (64% vs 25%; or, 5.4; 95% ci, 3.0-9.6; p < .001). specific diagnoses and disabilities for the ept group versus controls included cerebral palsy (9.1% vs 0%; p < .001), asthma (21.2% vs 6.8%; p = 001), iq < -2 sd (31.1% vs 4.9%; p < .001), poor motor skills without neurosensory impairment (21.9% vs 1.9%; p < .001), and psychiatric conditions (15.2% vs 1.9%; p < .001). adolescents born ept have considerable long-term health and educational needs. few had severe impairments that curtailed major activities of daily life.

patients with prader-willi syndrome (pws) display poor feeding and social skills as infants and fewer hypothalamic oxytocin (oxt)-producing neurons were documented in adults. animal data demonstrated that early treatment with oxt restores sucking after birth. our aim is to reproduce these data in infants with pws. we conducted a phase 2 escalating dose study of a short course (7 days) of intranasal oxt administration. we enrolled 18 infants with pws under 6 months old (6 infants in each step) who received 4 iu of oxt either every other day, daily, or twice daily. we investigated the tolerance and the effects on feeding and social skills and changes in circulating ghrelin and brain connectivity by functional mri. no adverse events were reported. no dose effect was observed. sucking assessed by the neonatal oral-motor scale was abnormal in all infants at baseline and normalized in 88% after treatment. the scores of neonatal oral-motor scale and videofluoroscopy of swallowing significantly decreased from 16 to 9 (p < .001) and from 18 to 12.5 (p < .001), respectively. significant improvements in clinical global impression scale scores, social withdrawal behavior, and mother-infant interactions were observed. we documented a significant increase in acylated ghrelin and connectivity of the right superior orbitofrontal network that correlated with changes in sucking and behavior. oxt is well tolerated in infants with pws and improves feeding and social skills. these results open perspectives for early treatment in neurodevelopment diseases with feeding problems.

little is known of the long-term, including school, outcomes of children diagnosed with neonatal abstinence syndrome (nas) (international statistical classification of disease and related problems [10th edition], australian modification, p96.1). linked analysis of health and curriculum-based test data for all children born in the state of new south wales (nsw), australia, between 2000 and 2006. children with nas (n = 2234) were compared with a control group matched for gestation, socioeconomic status, and gender (n = 4330, control) and with other nsw children (n = 598 265, population) for results on the national assessment program: literacy and numeracy, in grades 3, 5, and 7. mean test scores (range 0-1000) for children with nas were significantly lower in grade 3 (359 vs control: 410 vs population: 421). the deficit was progressive. by grade 7, children with nas scored lower than other children in grade 5. the risk of not meeting minimum standards was independently associated with nas (adjusted odds ratio [aor], 2.5; 95% confidence interval [ci], 2.2-2.7), indigenous status (aor, 2.2; 95% ci, 2.2-2.3), male gender (aor, 1.3; 95% ci, 1.3-1.4), and low parental education (aor, 1.5; 95% ci, 1.1-1.6), with all ps < .001. a neonatal diagnostic code of nas is strongly associated with poor and deteriorating school performance. parental education may decrease the risk of failure. children with nas and their families must be identified early and provided with support to minimize the consequences of poor educational outcomes.

exercise is linked with improved cognition and behavior in children in clinical and experimental settings. this translational study examined if an aerobic cybercycling intervention integrated into physical education (pe) resulted in improvements in behavioral self-regulation and classroom functioning among children with mental health disabilities attending a therapeutic day school. using a 14-week crossover design, students (n = 103) were randomly assigned by classroom (k = 14) to receive the 7-week aerobic cybercycling pe curriculum during fall 2014 or spring 2015. during the intervention, children used the bikes 2 times per week during 30- to 40-minute pe classes. during the control period, children participated in standard nonaerobic pe. mixed effects logistic regression was used to assess relationships between intervention exposures and clinical thresholds of behavioral outcomes, accounting for both individual and classroom random effects. children experienced 32% to 51% lower odds of poor self-regulation and learning-inhibiting disciplinary time out of class when participating in the intervention; this result is both clinically and statistically significant. effects were appreciably more pronounced on days that children participated in the aerobic exercise, but carryover effects were also observed. aerobic cybercycling pe shows promise for improving self-regulation and classroom functioning among children with complex behavioral health disorders. this school-based exercise intervention may significantly improve child behavioral health without increasing parental burden or health care costs, or disrupting academic schedules.

child maltreatment (abuse and neglect) has established effects on mental health. less is known about its influence on adult economic circumstances. we aimed to establish associations of child maltreatment with such outcomes and explore potential pathways. we used 1958 british birth cohort data (n = 8076) to examine associations of child neglect and abuse with adult (50 years) long-term sickness absence, not in employment, education or training (neet), lacking assets, income-related support, poor qualifications, financial insecurity, manual social class, and social mobility. we assessed mediation of associations by 16-year cognition and mental health. abuse prevalence varied from 1% (sexual) to 10% (psychological); 16% were neglected. a total of 21% experienced 1 maltreatment type, 10% experienced ≥2 types. sexual and nonsexual abuse were associated with several outcomes; eg, for sexual abuse, adjusted odds ratio (aor) of income-related support was 1.75 (95% confidence interval [ci], 1.12-2.72). associations were little affected by potential mediating factors. neglect was associated with several adult outcomes (eg, aor of neet was 1.43 [95% ci, 1.10-1.85]) and associations were mediated by cognition and mental health (primarily by cognition): percent explained varied between 4% (neet) to 70% (poor qualifications). in general, the risk of poor outcome increased by number of maltreatment types (eg, aor for long-term sickness absence increased from 1.0 [reference] to 1.76 [95% ci, 1.32-2.35] to 2.69 [95% ci, 1.96-3.68], respectively, for 0, 1, and ≥2 types of maltreatment. childhood maltreatment is associated with poor midadulthood socioeconomic outcomes, with accumulating risk for those experiencing multiple types of maltreatment. cognitive ability and mental health are implicated in the pathway to outcome for neglect but not abuse.

poverty is a common experience for many children and families in the united states. children <18 years old are disproportionately affected by poverty, making up 33% of all people in poverty. living in a poor or low-income household has been linked to poor health and increased risk for mental health problems in both children and adults that can persist across the life span. despite their high need for mental health services, children and families living in poverty are least likely to be connected with high-quality mental health care. pediatric primary care providers are in a unique position to take a leading role in addressing disparities in access to mental health care, because many low-income families come to them first to address mental health concerns. in this report, we discuss the impact of poverty on mental health, barriers to care, and integrated behavioral health care models that show promise in improving access and outcomes for children and families residing in the contexts of poverty. we also offer practice recommendations, relevant to providers in the primary care setting, that can help improve access to mental health care in this population.

tetanus is a rare disease in industrialized countries, largely due to the highly protective effect of immunization. we present a case of tetanus in a formerly preterm infant with myelomeningocele repaired in utero, who presented at 44 days of age with poor feeding, lethargy, and increased tone. his symptoms progressed despite a course of antibiotics for presumed meningitis. at 73 days of age (on 29th day of hospitalization), a clinical diagnosis of tetanus was made based on the presence of risus sardonicus, trismus, and generalized hypertonicity. consequently, tetanus immune globulin, muscle relaxants, and metronidazole were administered. five months later, the infant has had complete resolution of the hypertonicity, has regained normal jaw movement and swallowing, and is regaining oral feeding skills. this case involved a delay in diagnosis despite clinical symptoms and signs classic, in retrospect, for tetanus, highlighting the importance of recognizing the constellation of symptoms that should lead us to consider this rare diagnosis.

recent years have witnessed substantial gains in health insurance coverage for children, but few studies have examined trends across a diverse set of access indicators. we examine us children's access to health services and whether trends vary by race/ethnicity and income. analysis of 178 038 children ages 0 to 17 from the 2000 to 2014 national health interview survey. trends are examined for health insurance and 5 access indicators: no well-child visit in the year, no doctor office visit, no dental visit, no usual source of care, and unmet health needs. logistic regression models add controls for sociodemographics and child health status. statistical interactions test whether trends vary by race/ethnicity and income. among all children, uninsured rates declined from 12.1% in 2000 to 5.3% in 2014, with improvement across all 5 access indicators. along with steep declines in the uninsured rate, hispanic children had sizeable improvement for no doctor office (19.8% to 11.9%), no dental visit (43.2% to 21.8%), and no usual source of care (13.9% to 6.3%). black children and those in poor and near-poor families also had large gains. results from adjusted statistical interaction models showed more improvement for black and hispanic children versus whites for 3 of 5 access indicators and for children in poor and near-poor families for 4 of 5 access indicators. children's access to health services has improved since 2000 with greater gains in vulnerable population groups. findings support a need for continued support of health insurance for all children.

convulsive seizures account for 15% of pediatric air transports. we evaluated seizure treatment received in community hospital emergency departments among transported patients for adherence to recommended management. this study was a retrospective cohort study of children transported for an acute seizure to a tertiary pediatric hospital from 2010 to 2013. seizure treatment was evaluated for adherence to recommended management. the primary outcome was intubation. among 126 events, 61% did not receive recommended acute treatment. the most common deviation from recommended care was administration of >2 benzodiazepine doses. lack of adherence to recommended care was associated with a greater than twofold increased risk of intubation (relative risk 2.4; 95% confidence interval, 1.4-4.13) and 1.5-fold increased risk of admission to the icu (relative risk 1.65; 95% confidence interval, 1.24-2.16). duration of ventilation was commonly <24 hours (87%) for patients who did or did not receive recommended acute seizure care. among events treated initially with a benzodiazepine, only 32% received a recommended weight-based dosage, and underdosing was most common. adherence to evidence-based recommended acute seizure treatment during initial care of pediatric patients using medical air transportation was poor. intubation was more common when patients did not receive recommended acute seizure care. educational efforts with a sustained quality focus should be directed to increase adherence to appropriate pediatric seizure treatment of children in community emergency departments.

to investigate the impact of prenatal maternal iron deficiency (id) on cord blood serum ferritin (cbsf) concentration and infant cognitive and motor development. our prospective cohort study included 636 mother-singleton child pairs from 828 eligible pregnant women who were enrolled during their first antenatal care (anc) visit in allada, benin, into a clinical trial comparing the efficacy of mefloquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. venous blood samples of women were assessed for ferritin and hemoglobin concentrations at the first and second anc visits (occurring at least 1-month apart) and at delivery. women were prescribed daily iron and folic acid supplements throughout pregnancy. hematologic examinations were repeated for cord blood at birth. at age 1 year, cognitive and motor functions of children were assessed by using the mullen scales of early learning. the prevalence of prenatal id at first and second anc visits, and at delivery was 30.5%, 34.0%, and 28.4%, respectively. cbsf concentrations were similar between id and non-id pregnant women. neither prenatal id nor cbsf concentration was associated with poor cognitive or gross motor function of children at age 1 year. cbsf concentrations were lower among mothers who had id anemia (ida) at delivery compared with non-ida pregnant women (adjusted mean difference: -0.2 [95% confidence interval: -0.4 to -0.0]). in a malaria-endemic region, id in pregnancy in the context of iron supplementation is neither associated with cbsf concentration nor with infant cognitive and motor development. prenatal ida around the time of delivery is associated with lower cbsf concentrations.

the purpose of this study was to compare characteristics of youth who participate in the choking game alone versus those who participate in a group. lifetime prevalence estimates were obtained from the 2011 (n = 5682) and 2013 (n = 15 150) oregon healthy teens survey. the 2011 and 2013 data sets were merged (n = 20 832) to compare youth who participate alone versus those who participate in a group in the choking game. multivariate modeling was conducted to examine individual characteristics of young people who engaged in the choking game alone versus those who engaged in the game in a group. in 2011, 3.8% of eighth-grade participants reported a lifetime prevalence of choking game participation; 3.7% reported lifetime prevalence of participation in 2013. in the merged 2011/2013 data set, 17.6% (n = 93) of choking game participants indicated that they had participated alone. compared with those who reported participating in a group, youth who participated alone had significantly higher rates of suicide contemplation (odds ratio: 4.58; p < .001) and poor mental health (odds ratio: 2.13; p < .05). youth who participate alone in the choking game are a particularly high risk group, exhibiting substantially higher rates of suicidal ideation and poorer mental health compared with youth who participate in the choking game in a group. adolescent health care providers should be aware of these associations, assess whether prevention messaging is appropriate, and be prepared to explain the high risks of morbidity and mortality associated with participation.

in rwanda, significant progress has been made in advancing access to antiretroviral therapy (art) among youth. as availability of art increases, adherence is critical for preventing poor clinical outcomes and transmission of hiv. the goals of the study are to (1) describe art adherence and mental health problems among youth living with hiv aged 10 to 17; and (2) examine the association between these factors among this population in rural rwanda. a cross-sectional analysis was conducted that examined the association of mental health status and art adherence among youth (n = 193). art adherence, mental health status, and related variables were examined based on caregiver and youth report. nonadherence was defined as ever missing or refusing a dose of art within the past month. multivariate modeling was performed to examine the association between mental health status and art adherence. approximately 37% of youth missed or refused art in the past month. in addition, a high level of depressive symptoms (26%) and attempt to hurt or kill oneself (12%) was observed in this population of youth living with hiv in rwanda. in multivariate analysis, nonadherence was significantly associated with some mental health outcomes, including conduct problems (odds ratio 2.90, 95% confidence interval 1.55-5.43) and depression (odds ratio 1.02, 95% confidence interval 1.01-1.04), according to caregiver report. a marginally significant association was observed for youth report of depressive symptoms. the findings suggest that mental health should be considered among the factors related to art nonadherence in hiv services for youth, particularly for mental health outcomes, such as conduct problems and depression.

poor plasma bilirubin binding increases the risk of bilirubin neurotoxicity in newborns with hyperbilirubinemia. new laboratory tests may soon make it possible to obtain a complete bilirubin binding panel when evaluating these babies. the 3 measured components of the panel are the plasma total bilirubin concentration (btotal), which is currently used to guide clinical care; the bilirubin binding capacity (bbc); and the concentration of non-albumin bound or free bilirubin (bfree). the fourth component is the bilirubin-albumin equilibrium dissociation constant, kd, which is calculated from btotal, bbc, and bfree the bilirubin binding panel is comparable to the panel of components used in the henderson-hasselbalch approach to acid-base assessment. bilirubin binding population parameters (not prospective studies to determine whether the new bilirubin binding panel components are better predictors of bilirubin neurotoxicity than btotal) are needed to expedite the clinical use of bilirubin binding. at any btotal, the bfree and the relative risk of bilirubin neurotoxicity increase as the kd/bbc ratio increases (ie, bilirubin binding worsens). comparing the kd/bbc ratio of newborns with btotal of concern with that typical for the population helps determine whether the risk of bilirubin neurotoxicity varies significantly from the inherent risk at that btotal furthermore, the bilirubin binding panel individualizes care because it helps to determine how aggressive intervention should be at any btotal, irrespective of whether it is above or below established btotal guidelines. the bilirubin binding panel may reduce anxiety, costs, unnecessary treatment, and the likelihood of undetected bilirubin neurotoxicity.

the purpose of this statement is to update recommendations for the routine use of seasonal influenza vaccine and antiviral medications for the prevention and treatment of influenza in children. the aap recommends annual seasonal influenza immunization for everyone 6 months and older, including children and adolescents. highlights for the upcoming 2016-2017 season include the following: 1. annual universal influenza immunization is indicated with either a trivalent or quadrivalent (no preference) inactivated vaccine.2. the 2016-2017 influenza a (h3n2) vaccine strain differs from that contained in the 2015-2016 seasonal vaccines. the 2016-2017 influenza b vaccine strain (victoria lineage) included in the trivalent vaccine differs from that contained in the 2015-2016 seasonal trivalent vaccines (yamagata lineage). a. trivalent vaccine contains an a/california/7/2009 (h1n1)pdm09-like virus, an a/hong kong/4801/2014 (h3n2)-like virus, and a b/brisbane/60/2008-like virus (b/victoria lineage). b. quadrivalent vaccine contains an additional b virus (b/phuket/3073/2013-like virus [b/yamagata lineage]).3. quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine (laiv4) should not be used in any setting during the 2016-2017 influenza season in light of the evidence for poor effectiveness of laiv4 in recent seasons, particularly against influenza a (h1n1)pdm09 viruses.4. all children with egg allergy can receive influenza vaccine with no additional precautions from those of routine vaccinations.5. all hcp should receive an annual influenza vaccine, a crucial step in preventing influenza and reducing health care-associated influenza infections. because hcp may care for or live with people at high risk of influenza-related complications, it is especially important for them to get vaccinated annually.6. pediatricians should attempt to promptly identify children suspected of having influenza for rapid antiviral treatment, when indicated, to reduce morbidity and mortality.

to examine whether the industry-run television (tv) parental guidelines discriminate on violence, sexual behavior, alcohol use, and smoking in tv shows, to assess their usefulness for parents. seventeen tv shows (323 episodes and 9214 episode minutes) across several tv show rating categories (tvy7, tvpg, tv14, and tvma) were evaluated. we content-coded the episodes, recording seconds of each risk behavior, and we rated the salience of violence in each one. multilevel models were used to test for associations between tv rating categories and prevalence of risk behaviors across and within episodes or salience of violence. every show had at least 1 risk behavior. violence was pervasive, occurring in 70% of episodes overall and for 2.3 seconds per episode minute. alcohol was also common (58% of shows, 2.3 seconds per minute), followed by sex (53% of episodes, 0.26 seconds per minute), and smoking (31% of shows, 0.54 seconds per minute). tv parental guidelines did not discriminate prevalence estimates of tv episode violence. although tv-y7 shows had significantly less substance use, other categories were poor at discriminating substance use, which was as common in tv-14 as tv-ma shows. sex and gory violence were the only behaviors demonstrating a graded increase in prevalence and salience for older-child rating categories. tv parental guidelines ratings were ineffective in discriminating shows for 3 out of 4 behaviors studied. even in shows rated for children as young as 7 years, violence was prevalent, prominent, and salient. tv ratings were most effective for identification of sexual behavior and gory violence.

several studies have suggested an association between functional defecation disorders (fdds) and overweight/obesity in children. to synthesize current evidence evaluating the association between fdds and overweight/obesity in children. pubmed, medline, and embase were searched from inception until january 25, 2016. prospective and cross-sectional studies investigating the association between fdds and overweight/obesity in children 0 to 18 years were included. data generation was performed independently by 2 authors and quality was assessed by using quality assessment tools from the national heart, lung, and blood institute. eight studies were included: 2 studies evaluating the prevalence of fdds in obese children, 3 studies evaluating the prevalence of overweight/obesity in children with fdds, and 3 population-based studies. both studies in obesity clinics revealed a higher prevalence of functional constipation (21%-23%) compared with the general population (3%-16%). in 3 case-control studies, the prevalence of overweight (12%-33%) and obesity (17%-20%) was found to be higher in fdd patients compared with controls (13%-23% and 0%-12%, respectively), this difference was significant in 2/3 studies. one of 3 population-based studies revealed evidence for an association between fdds and overweight/obesity. quality of 7/8 studies was rated fair or poor. due to heterogeneity of the study designs, we refrained from statistically pooling. although several studies have revealed the potential association between fdds and excessive bodyweight in children, results across included studies in this review differ strongly and are conflicting. therefore, this systematic review could not confirm or refute this association.

refugee children are at high developmental risk due to dislocation and deprivation. standardized developmental screening in this diverse population is challenging. we used the health belief model to guide key-informant interviews and focus groups with medical interpreters, health care providers, community collaborators, and refugee parents to explore key elements needed for developmental screening. cultural and community-specific values and practices related to child development and barriers and facilitators to screening were examined. we conducted 19 interviews and 2 focus groups involving 16 bhutanese-nepali, burmese, iraqi, and somali participants, 7 community collaborators, and 6 providers from the center for refugee health in rochester, new york. subjects were identified through purposive sampling until data saturation. interviews were recorded, coded, and analyzed using a qualitative framework technique. twenty-one themes in 4 domains were identified: values/beliefs about development/disability, practices around development/disability, the refugee experience, and feedback specific to the parents' evaluation of developmental status screen. most participants denied a word for "development" in their primary language and reported limited awareness of developmental milestones. concern was unlikely unless speech or behavior problems were present. physical disabilities were recognized but not seen as problematic. perceived barriers to identification of delays included limited education, poor healthcare knowledge, language, and traditional healing practices. facilitators included community navigators, trust in health care providers, in-person interpretation, visual supports, and education about child development. refugee perspectives on child development may influence a parent's recognition of and response to developmental concerns. despite challenges, standardized screening was supported.

childhood apraxia of speech is a neurologic speech sound disorder in which children have difficulty constructing words and sounds due to poor motor planning and coordination of the articulators required for speech sound production. we report the case of a 3-year-old boy strongly suspected to have childhood apraxia of speech at 18 months of age who used multimodal communication to facilitate language development throughout his work with a speech language pathologist. in 18 months of an intensive structured program, he exhibited atypical rapid improvement, progressing from having no intelligible speech to achieving age-appropriate articulation. we suspect that early introduction of sign language by family proved to be a highly effective form of language development, that when coupled with intensive oro-motor and speech sound therapy, resulted in rapid resolution of symptoms.

we aimed to produce quantitative estimates of the associations between 4 domains of child development and linear growth during 3 periods: before birth, early infancy, and later infancy. we also aimed to determine whether several factors attenuated these associations. in 3700 children in burkina faso, ghana, and malawi, growth was measured several times from birth to age 18 months. at 18 months, language, motor, socioemotional, and executive function development were assessed. in burkina faso (n = 1111), personal-social development was assessed rather than the latter 2 domains. linear growth was significantly associated with language, motor, and personal-social development but not socioemotional development or executive function. for language, the pooled adjusted estimate of the association with length-for-age z score (laz) at 6 months was 0.13 ± 0.02 sd, and with δlaz from 6 to 18 months it was 0.11 ± 0.03 sd. for motor, these estimates were 0.16 ± 0.02 sd and 0.22 ± 0.03 sd, respectively. in 1412 children measured at birth, estimates of the association with laz at birth were similar (0.07-0.16 sd for language and 0.09-0.18 sd for motor development). these associations were weaker or absent in certain subsets of children with high levels of developmental stimulation or mothers who received nutritional supplementation. growth faltering during any period from before birth to 18 months is associated with poor development of language and motor skills. interventions to provide developmental stimulation or maternal supplementation may protect children who are faltering in growth from poor language and motor development.

developmental outcomes of very preterm (gestational age ≤32 weeks) or very low birth weight (<1500 g) children are commonly reported before age 3 years although the predictive validity for later outcomes are uncertain. to determine the validity of early developmental assessments in predicting school-age cognitive deficits. pubmed. english-language studies reporting at least 2 serial developmental/cognitive assessments on the same population, 1 between ages 1 and 3 years and 1 at ≥5 years. for each study, we calculated the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of early assessment for cognitive deficit (defined as test scores 1 sd below the population mean). pooled meta-analytic sensitivity and specificity were estimated by using a hierarchical summary receiver operator characteristic curve. we included 24 studies (n = 3133 children). early assessments were conducted at 18 to 40 months and generally involved the bayley scales of infant development or the griffiths mental development scales; 11 different cognitive tests were used at school-age assessments at 5 to 18 years. positive predictive values ranged from 20.0% to 88.9%, and negative predictive vales ranged from 47.8% to 95.5%. the pooled sensitivity (95% confidence interval) of early assessment for identifying school-age cognitive deficit was 55.0% (45.7%-63.9%) and specificity was 84.1% (77.5%-89.1%). gestational age, birth weight, age at assessment, and time between assessments did not explain between-study heterogeneity. the accuracy of aggregated data could not be verified. many assessment tools have been superseded by newer editions. early developmental assessment has poor sensitivity but good specificity and negative predictive value for school-age cognitive deficit.

the quality of care for children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) delivered in community-based pediatric settings is often poor. interventions have been developed to improve community-based adhd care but have not demonstrated that better care results in improved patient outcomes. the objective of this study was to determine whether an adhd quality improvement (qi) intervention for community-based pediatric practices improves patient outcomes. a cluster randomized controlled trial was conducted in which 50 community-based pediatric primary care practices (213 providers) were randomized either to receive a technology-assisted qi intervention or to a control condition. the intervention consisted of 4 training sessions, office flow modification, guided qi, and an adhd internet portal to assist with treatment monitoring. adhd treatment processes and parent- and teacher-rated adhd symptoms over the first year of treatment were collected for 577 patients. intent-to-treat analyses examining outcomes of all children assessed for adhd were not significant (b = -1.97, p = .08). however, among the 373 children prescribed adhd medication, there was a significant intervention effect (b = -2.42, p = .04) indicating greater reductions in parent ratings of adhd symptoms after treatment among patients treated by intervention physicians compared with patients treated at control practices. there were no group differences on teacher ratings of adhd symptoms. adhd treatment care around medication was significantly better at intervention practices compared with control practices. a technology-assisted qi intervention improved some adhd care quality and resulted in additional reductions in parent-rated adhd symptoms among patients prescribed adhd medications.

immunization against the human papillomavirus (hpv) is effective at preventing hpv-related cancers, but vaccination rates have remained low. levels of awareness could conceivably influence vaccination rates, but currently the relationship is unknown. this is the first study to test how strongly levels of awareness among parents and adolescents are related to subsequent hpv vaccination among a high-risk population of adolescents. this longitudinal cohort study measured baseline levels of awareness (about hpv, cervical cancer, hpv vaccination, and news or advertisements about hpv vaccination) among parents of adolescents and also a separate sample of adolescents. participants resided in predominantly low-income, african american neighborhoods of a large american city. during a 12-month follow-up period, the outcome measures were defined as adolescent receipt of any hpv vaccination, as measured by clinic records. within 1 year, <16% of adolescents received vaccination. the relationship between awareness and subsequent vaccination was either not statistically significant or not meaningful in magnitude, with r(2) = 0.004 to 0.02. the predicted probability of getting vaccination was <0.50 for all awareness levels and prediction accuracy was poor (area under the curve = 0.56-0.64). in this high-risk population, levels of awareness among parents and adolescents were not substantially related to subsequent adolescent hpv vaccination.

national guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hypertension in children have been available for nearly 40 years. unfortunately, knowledge and recognition of the problem by clinicians remain poor. prevalence estimates are highly variable because of differing standards, populations, and blood pressure (bp) measurement techniques. estimates in the united states range from 0.3% to 4.5%. risk factors for primary hypertension include overweight and obesity, male sex, older age, high sodium intake, and african american or latino ancestry. data relating hypertension in childhood to later cardiovascular events is currently lacking. it is known that bp in childhood is highly predictive of bp in adulthood. compelling data about target organ damage is available, including the association of hypertension with left ventricular hypertrophy, carotid-intima media thickness, and microalbuminuria. guidelines from both the united states and europe include detailed recommendations for diagnosis and management. diagnostic standards are based on clinic readings, ambulatory bp monitoring is useful in confirming diagnosis of hypertension and identifying white-coat hypertension, masked hypertension, and secondary hypertension, as well as monitoring response to therapy. research priorities include the need for reliable prevalence estimates based on diverse populations and data about the long-term impact of childhood hypertension on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. priorities to improve clinical practice include more education among clinicians about diagnosis and management, clinical decision support to aid in diagnosis, and routine use of ambulatory bp monitoring to aid in diagnosis and to monitor response to treatment.

after postoperative deaths in children who were prescribed codeine, several pediatric hospitals have removed it from their formularies. these deaths were attributed to atypical cytochrome p450 2d6 (cyp2d6) pharmacogenetics, which is also implicated in poor analgesic response. because codeine is often prescribed to patients with sickle cell disease and is now the only schedule iii opioid analgesic in the united states, we implemented a precision medicine approach to safely maintain codeine as an option for pain control. here we describe the implementation of pharmacogenetics-based codeine prescribing that accounts for cyp2d6 metabolizer status. clinical decision support was implemented within the electronic health record to guide prescribing of codeine with the goal of preventing its use after tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy and in cyp2d6 ultra-rapid and poor metabolizer (high-risk) genotypes. as of june 2015, cyp2d6 genotype results had been reported for 2468 unique patients. of the 830 patients with sickle cell disease, 621 (75%) had a cyp2d6 genotype result; 7.1% were ultra-rapid or possible ultra-rapid metabolizers, and 1.4% were poor metabolizers. interruptive alerts recommended against codeine for patients with high-risk cyp2d6 status. none of the patients with an ultra-rapid or poor metabolizer genotype were prescribed codeine. using genetics to tailor analgesic prescribing retained an important therapeutic option by limiting codeine use to patients who could safely receive and benefit from it. our efforts represent an evidence-based, innovative medication safety strategy to prevent adverse drug events, which is a model for the use of pharmacogenetics to optimize drug therapy in specialized pediatric populations.

gestational age (ga) is frequently unknown or inaccurate in pregnancies in low-income countries. early identification of preterm infants may help link them to potentially life-saving interventions. we conducted a validation study in a community-based birth cohort in rural bangladesh. ga was determined by pregnancy ultrasound (<20 weeks). community health workers conducted home visits (<72 hours) to assess physical/neuromuscular signs and measure anthropometrics. the distribution, agreement, and diagnostic accuracy of different clinical methods of ga assessment were determined compared with early ultrasound dating. in the live-born cohort (n = 1066), the mean ultrasound ga was 39.1 weeks (sd 2.0) and prevalence of preterm birth (<37 weeks) was 11.4%. among assessed newborns (n = 710), the mean ultrasound ga was 39.3 weeks (sd 1.6) (8.3% preterm) and by ballard scoring the mean ga was 38.9 weeks (sd 1.7) (12.9% preterm). the average bias of the ballard was -0.4 weeks; however, 95% limits of agreement were wide (-4.7 to 4.0 weeks) and the accuracy for identifying preterm infants was low (sensitivity 16%, specificity 87%). simplified methods for ga assessment had poor diagnostic accuracy for identifying preterm births (community health worker prematurity scorecard [sensitivity/specificity: 70%/27%]; capurro [5%/96%]; eregie [75%/58%]; bhagwat [18%/87%], foot length <75 mm [64%/35%]; birth weight <2500 g [54%/82%]). neonatal anthropometrics had poor to fair performance for classifying preterm infants (areas under the receiver operating curve 0.52-0.80). newborn clinical assessment of ga is challenging at the community level in low-resource settings. anthropometrics are also inaccurate surrogate markers for ga in settings with high rates of fetal growth restriction.

food and beverage marketing has been associated with childhood obesity. we quantified the number and type of food or beverage brands promoted by music celebrities, assessed the nutritional quality of the products, and examined teen choice award data to assess the celebrities' popularity among adolescents. this was a descriptive study. a list of music celebrities associated with the 2013 and 2014 billboard hot 100 chart, which ranks songs according to sales and radio impressions, was compiled. data on celebrity endorsements were gathered from official company web sites, youtube commercials, an advertising database, and media reports. nutritional quality of foods was assessed according to the nutrient profile index, whereas nonalcoholic beverages were evaluated based on calories from added sugar. teen choice award nominations were used to measure the celebrities' popularity among adolescents. of the 590 endorsements made by the 163 celebrities in the sample, consumer goods (eg, fragrances, makeup) represented the largest endorsement category (26%), followed by food and beverage (18%) and retail (11%). sixty-five celebrities were collectively associated with 57 different food and beverage brands owned by 38 parent companies. of these 65 celebrities, 53 (81.5%) had ≥1 teen choice award nomination. forty-nine (71%) of the 69 nonalcoholic beverage references promoted sugar-sweetened beverages. twenty-one (80.8%) of the 26 endorsed foods were energy dense and nutrient poor. baauer, will.i.am, justin timberlake, maroon 5, and britney spears had the most food and beverage endorsements. this study demonstrates that music celebrities who are popular among adolescents endorse energy-dense, nutrient-poor products.

perinatal outcomes have improved in developed countries but remain poor for disadvantaged populations. we examined whether an unconditional income supplement to low-income pregnant women was associated with improved birth outcomes. this study included all mother-newborn pairs (2003-2010) in manitoba, canada, where the mother received prenatal social assistance, the infant was born in the hospital, and the pair had a risk screen (n = 14 591). low-income women who received the income supplement (healthy baby prenatal benefit [hbpb], n = 10 738) were compared with low-income women who did not receive hbpb (n = 3853) on the following factors: low birth weight, preterm, small and large for gestational age, apgar score, breastfeeding initiation, neonatal readmission, and newborn hospital length of stay (los). covariates from risk screens were used to develop propensity scores and to balance differences between groups in regression models; γ sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess sensitivity to unmeasured confounding. population-attributable and preventable fractions were calculated. hbpb was associated with reductions in low birth weight (arr, 0.71 [95% ci, 0.63-0.81]), preterm births (arr, 0.76 [95% ci, 0.69-0.84]) and small for gestational age births (arr, 0.90 [95% ci, 0.81-0.99]) and increases in breastfeeding (arr, 1.06 [95% ci, 1.03-1.09]) and large for gestational age births (arr, 1.13 [95% ci, 1.05-1.23]). for vaginal births, hbpb was associated with shortened los (weighted mean, 2.86; p < .0001). results for breastfeeding, low birth weight, preterm birth, and los were robust to unmeasured confounding. reductions of 21% (95% ci, 13.6-28.3) for low birth weight births and 17.5% (95% ci, 11.2-23.8) for preterm births were associated with hbpb. receipt of an unconditional prenatal income supplement was associated with positive outcomes. placing conditions on income supplements may not be necessary to promote prenatal and perinatal health.

pseudotumor cerebri syndrome (ptcs) is characterized by increased intracranial pressure with normal brain parenchyma and cerebrospinal fluid constituents. ptcs after withdrawal of systemic corticosteroids also has been described in children. in contrast, to our knowledge, ptcs after withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids has not previously been described. here we report the case of an 8-year and 6-month-old girl who developed signs and symptoms consistent with ptcs after withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids. the patient had excellent adherence to inhaled glucocorticoid therapy for ∼1 year before presentation, after which the therapy was stopped for concern related to poor growth. the withdrawal of inhaled glucocorticoids was associated with the development of severe headaches and diplopia, and further clinical examination led to the patient's diagnosis of likely ptcs. although its occurrence is likely rare, clinicians caring for the many children receiving inhaled glucocorticoid therapy should be aware of the potential for ptcs after abrupt withdrawal of such treatment, and consider ophthalmology evaluation if patients report suggestive symptoms, such as headaches or vision changes in this context.

poor adherence to recommended screening for autism spectrum disorder (asd) and pediatricians' lack of confidence in providing care for children with asd reflect quality gaps in primary care. this study aimed to increase the proportion of toddlers screened for asd and improve physicians' self-efficacy in providing care to children with asd. twenty-six utah primary care practices participated in a 3 to 6 month learning collaborative (lc) to improve identification and ongoing care of children with asd. monthly chart audits assessed whether an asd screening tool was administered at 18- and 24-month visits. physicians completed pre-lc and post-lc surveys to assess changes in self-efficacy in providing care and changes in perceived barriers to implementation of screening and caring for children with asd. before the lc, 15% of 18- and 24-month visits had documented asd screening, compared with 91% during the last month of the lc (p < .001). this rate of asd screening was sustained 4 years after the lc by most practices. compared with survey responses before the lc, physicians reported significant improvement in their ability to care for children with asd and decreases in their perceived barriers to screening and caring for children with asd. the lc was effective in increasing and sustaining recommended asd screening of toddlers and improving physicians' perceived self-efficacy in caring for children with asd. improving primary care screening, skills, and knowledge may improve the timing of diagnosis, initiation of treatment, quality of care, and outcomes for children with asd.

a 17-year-old girl presented with facial swelling and shortness of breath to an outside emergency department. she was treated for an allergic reaction with steroids and antihistamines, and discharged from the hospital. subsequently, she was referred as an outpatient to pediatric nephrology for recurrent edema and proteinuria. initial laboratory workup by nephrology was significant for a normal complete blood count and reassuring electrolyte panel. pertinent laboratories were a creatinine of 0.5 mg/dl (0.4-1.1 mg/dl) and an albumin 2.3 g/dl (3.5-5.0 g/dl). the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was >7 (<0.2). a renal ultrasound showed symmetrically sized kidneys with normal echotexture. the patient's renal biopsy results were consistent with minimal change disease. based on the biopsy results, prednisone was started. due to a poor response to prednisone, an alternate immunomodulator therapy was selected. her subsequent complete blood counts showed a downward trend of all cell lines and an elevated serum uric acid. concurrently, she reported worsening fatigue, low back pain, nausea, vomiting, night sweats, and pruritus. more details of her case and the outcome are presented.

infantile refsum disease (ird) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of peroxisome biogenesis characterized by generalized peroxisomal metabolic dysfunction, including accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids (vlcfas) and phytanic acid (pa), as well as decreased plasmalogen contents (pl). an effective therapy for this intractable disease has not been established, and only supportive management with docosahexaenoic acid supplementation and low pa diet has been reported so far. a boy of 3 years and 8 months presented with facial dysmorphism, transaminitis, and psychomotor retardation. biochemical analysis showed elevated pa and vlcfas, with reduced pl in the serum. immunofluorescence study of fibroblasts from the patient indicated a mosaic pattern of catalase-positive and -negative particles, and molecular analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations of pex6 the failure of medical management to prevent the progression of clinical symptoms and abnormal biochemistry prompted us to consider liver transplantation (lt). with the chances of receiving a deceased donor liver being poor, we performed a living-donor lt from the patient's heterozygous mother. at 6-month follow-up, the patient's serum pa levels had normalized. vlcfas and pl levels had declined and increased, respectively. to the best of our knowledge, this is the second reported case in which ird was treated by living-donor lt by using a heterozygous donor. only long-term follow-up will reveal if there is any clinical improvement in the present case. with the liver being a major site for peroxisomal pathways, its replacement by lt may work as a form of partial enzyme therapy for patients with ird.

pediatric sleep disturbances are regularly diagnosed on the basis of parental reports. however, the impact of parental sleeping problems on parental perceptions and reports of their child's sleep has not yet been studied. we hypothesized that poor parental sleep decreases the parent-reported child sleep quality. a 1-week actigraph recording was performed in 100 children aged 2 to 6 years recruited in 16 day care centers. their biological parents completed a sleep diary and a sleep disturbance scale for children (sdsc) on children's sleep. the parents also completed the jenkins' sleep scale on their own sleep, the 12-item general health questionnaire, and questions on demographic factors. linear regression analyses were performed to study the association of the parental jenkins' score on their child's total sdsc score. analyses were also performed for 3 of the subscales of the sdsc: disorders of excessive somnolence, disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep, and sleep-wake transition disorders. parental sleeping problems were associated with more frequent reporting of children's sleeping problems. this association was unexplained by the actigraph measures of children's sleep, such as actual 24-hour sleep time and sleep efficiency, parental mental health problems, or any other tested potential confounder or mediator. similar correlations were seen for the 3 analyzed subscales. parental sleep quality was associated with overreporting of sleep problems in their children. this finding emphasizes the importance of considering parental sleep quality in the diagnosis, treatment, and research of pediatric sleeping problems.

despite reductions in mortality and morbidity among children born extremely preterm, they remain at high risk of neurocognitive deficits, with up to 40% having significant cognitive deficits at school age. we assessed the rate of neurocognitive impairment in a contemporary us cohort of 873 children aged 10 years who were born <28 weeks' gestation. the families of 889 of 966 (92%) children enrolled from 2002 to 2004 at 14 sites in 5 states returned at age 10 years for a comprehensive assessment of iq, language, attention, executive function, processing speed, visual perception, visual-motor function, and academic achievement. a total of 873 children were assessed with well-validated tests of cognitive and academic function. distributions of test scores were consistently and markedly shifted below normative expectation, with one-third to two-thirds of children performing >1 sd below age expectation. the most extreme downward shifts were on measures of executive control and processing speed. multivariate analyses, adjusted for socioeconomic status, growth restriction, and other potential confounders, revealed that the risk of poor outcome was highest at the lowest gestational age across all 18 measures. more than half of our extremely preterm cohort exhibited moderate or severe neurocognitive deficits at age 10 years, with the most extensive impairments found among those born at the lowest gestational age. children born extremely preterm continue to be at significant risk of persistent impairments in neurocognitive function and academic achievement, underscoring the need for monitoring and remediating such outcomes beginning in early childhood.

the link between poverty and children's health is well recognized. even temporary poverty may have an adverse effect on children's health, and data consistently support the observation that poverty in childhood continues to have a negative effect on health into adulthood. in addition to childhood morbidity being related to child poverty, epidemiologic studies have documented a mortality gradient for children aged 1 to 15 years (and adults), with poor children experiencing a higher mortality rate than children from higher-income families. the global great recession is only now very slowly abating for millions of america's children and their families. at this difficult time in the history of our nation's families and immediately after the 50th anniversary year of president lyndon johnson's war on poverty, it is particularly germane for the american academy of pediatrics, which is "dedicated to the health of all children," to publish a research-supported technical report that examines the mediators associated with the long-recognized adverse effects of child poverty on children and their families. this technical report draws on research from a number of disciplines, including physiology, sociology, psychology, economics, and epidemiology, to describe the present state of knowledge regarding poverty's negative impact on children's health and development. children inherit not only their parents' genes but also the family ecology and its social milieu. thus, parenting skills, housing, neighborhood, schools, and other factors (eg, medical care) all have complex relations to each other and influence how each child's genetic canvas is expressed. accompanying this technical report is a policy statement that describes specific actions that pediatricians and other child advocates can take to attenuate the negative effects of the mediators identified in this technical report and improve the well-being of our nation's children and their families.

in the united states, >40% of children are either poor or near-poor. as a group, children in poverty are more likely to experience worse health and more developmental delay, lower achievement, and more behavioral and emotional problems than their more advantaged peers; however, there is broad variability in outcomes among children exposed to similar conditions. building on a robust literature from animal models showing that environmental deprivation or enrichment shapes the brain, there has been increasing interest in understanding how the experience of poverty may shape the brain in humans. in this review, we summarize research on the relationship between socioeconomic status and brain development, focusing on studies published in the last 5 years. drawing on a conceptual framework informed by animal models, we highlight neural plasticity, epigenetics, material deprivation (eg, cognitive stimulation, nutrient deficiencies), stress (eg, negative parenting behaviors), and environmental toxins as factors that may shape the developing brain. we then summarize the existing evidence for the relationship between child poverty and brain structure and function, focusing on brain areas that support memory, emotion regulation, and higher-order cognitive functioning (ie, hippocampus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex) and regions that support language and literacy (ie, cortical areas of the left hemisphere). we then consider some limitations of the current literature and discuss the implications of neuroscience concepts and methods for interventions in the pediatric medical home.

previous studies have documented poor rates of delivery of preventive services, 1 of the core services provided in the primary care medical home setting. we aimed to increase the reliability of delivering a bundle of preventive services to patients 0 to 14 months of age from 58% of patient visits to 95% of visits. the bundle includes administration of routine vaccinations, offering influenza vaccination, completed lead screening, completed developmental screening tool, screening for maternal depression and food insecurity, and documentation of gestational age. the setting was 3 academic pediatric primary care clinics that serve 31,000 patients (>90% medicaid). quality improvement methodology was used and key driver diagram was determined. patient "ideal visit flow" and the responsible, accountable, support, consulted, and informed matrix were developed to drive accountability for components of the ideal flow. plan, do, study, act cycles were used to develop successful interventions. the percent of patients seen who received all bundle elements for which they were eligible was plotted weekly on a run chart, and statistical process control methods were used to determine a significant change in performance. the preintervention percentage of patient visits ages 0 to 14 months receiving all preventive service bundle elements was 58%. the postintervention percentage is 92%. innovative redesign led to improvement in percentage of patients age 0 to 14 months who received the entire preventive services bundle. key elements for success were multidisciplinary site-specific teams, redesigned visit flow, effective communication, and resources for data and project management.

demand for unplanned hospital services is rising, and children are frequent users, especially where access to primary care is poor. in england, universal health care coverage entitles parents to see a general practitioner (gp) for first-contact care. however, access to gp appointments is variable, and few patients can see their own regular gp out of hours (ooh). the goal of this study explored the association between access to gps , emergency department (ed) visits and short hospitalizations (<2 days) in children in england. ed visit and short hospitalization rates were investigated in 9.5 million children aged <15 years registered with english family practices between april 2011 and march 2012 by using administrative hospital data. six access categories ranked all practices according to patients' reported ability to schedule gp appointments; from national gp patient survey data. gp consulting hours were 8:00 am to 6:30 pm on weekdays. there were 3 074 616 ed visits (56% ooh) and 470 752 short hospitalizations over the 12 months studied. children registered with practices in the highest access group compared with the lowest were 9% less likely to visit an ed (adjusted rate ratio: 0.91 [95% confidence interval: 0.89-93]), particularly ooh compared with consulting hours (10% vs 7%). children in the highest access groups were equally likely to be admitted for a short stay. increasing gp accessibility might alleviate the burden of ed visits from children, particularly during peak times ooh. short hospitalizations may be more sensitive to other aspects of health systems.

the study of vascular anomalies is a rapidly progressing field in medicine. the development of new knowledge in the pathology and management of these disease processes are exemplified in the treatment of hemangiomas with propranolol and generalized lymphatic malformations with sirolimus. central conducting lymphatic anomalies have traditionally been refractory to medical and surgical interventions. we report a case of a central conducting lymphatic anomaly that was responsive to sirolimus. a 14-year-old boy presented with chylothorax and chyluria with a lymphangiogram demonstrating abnormal lymphatic flow and reflux along the entire course of the central channels. traditionally, medical management has been limited to somatostatin and low-fat diet with poor response and surgical interventions that are palliative. sirolimus allows a new medical option that could improve management of this unresponsive population.

childhood asthma prevalence doubled from 1980 to 1995 and then increased more slowly from 2001 to 2010. during this second period, racial disparities increased. more recent trends remain to be described. we analyzed current asthma prevalence using 2001-2013 national health interview survey data for children ages 0 to 17 years. logistic regression with quadratic terms was used to test for nonlinear patterns in trends. differences between demographic subgroups were further assessed with multivariate models controlling for gender, age, poverty status, race/ethnicity, urbanicity, and geographic region. overall, childhood asthma prevalence increased from 2001 to 2009 followed by a plateau then a decline in 2013. from 2001 to 2013, multivariate logistic regression showed no change in prevalence among non-hispanic white and puerto rican children and those in the northeast and west; increasing prevalence among 10- to 17-year-olds, poor children, and those living in the south; increasing then plateauing prevalence among 5- to 9-year-olds, near-poor children, and non-hispanic black children; and increasing then decreasing prevalence among 0- to 4-year-olds, nonpoor, and mexican children and those in the midwest. non-hispanic black-white disparities stopped increasing, and puerto rican children remained with the highest prevalence. current asthma prevalence ceased to increase among children in recent years and the non-hispanic black-white disparity stopped increasing due mainly to plateauing prevalence among non-hispanic black children.

children with cystic fibrosis (cf) often report poor sleep, increased daytime sleepiness, and fatigue. the purpose of this study was to identify respiratory patterns over the spectrum of disease severity in children with cf. the overall hypothesis for the current study is that children with cf compared with snoring control subjects demonstrate gas exchange abnormalities and increased respiratory loads during sleep that are not reported or recognized by conventional polysomnography (psg). analysis of breathing patterns and gas exchange on psg was performed in children with cf and healthy controls matched by age and bmi. for all cf and control subjects, the indication for psg was evaluation for obstructive sleep apnea based on a history of snoring. children with cf, compared with age- and bmi-matched snoring controls, demonstrated lower oxyhemoglobin saturation (95% ± 1.6% vs 98% ± 0.6%, p = .005), higher respiratory rate (19.5 ± 4.9 vs 16.5 ± 1.2 breaths per minute, p = .03), and a higher proportion of inspiratory flow limitation (44.1% ± 24.7% vs 12.1% ± 13.5%, p = .007) during non-rapid eye movement sleep. the respiratory disturbance index did not differ between cf and snoring control groups (1.5 ± 2.7 vs 0.6 ± 0.6 events per hour, p = .11). children with cf exhibited abnormalities in gas exchange and increased respiratory load during sleep compared with normal age- and bmi-matched snoring controls. because these abnormalities were independent of weight and lung function, sleep state may serve as an opportunity for early detection of breathing abnormalities and possibly cf lung disease progression.

cushing's syndrome (cs) in the pediatric population is challenging to diagnose and treat. although next-generation medical therapies are emerging for adults with cs, none are currently approved or used in children. here we describe the first use of mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, to treat cs in a pediatric subject. the patient, a 14-year-old girl with an 18-month history of metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma, suffered from fatigue, profound myopathy, irritability, and depression. she was found to have hypertension, hypokalemia, and worsening control of her preexisting type 1 diabetes. in this report, we detail our clinical evaluation that confirmed cs caused by an ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone secreting tumor. surgical and radiation therapies were not pursued because of her poor functional status and limited life expectancy, and medical treatment of cs was indicated for symptom relief. mifepristone treatment provided rapid improvement in glycemic control, insulin resistance, and hypertension as well as significant diminishment of her myopathy and fatigue. hypokalemia was managed with an oral potassium replacement and dose escalation of spironolactone; no other significant adverse effects were observed. despite successful palliation of cushing's signs and symptoms, the patient died of progression of her cancer. this case demonstrates the safety and efficacy of mifepristone treatment in a pediatric patient with symptomatic, ectopic cs. we conclude that, in appropriate pediatric patients with cs, glucocorticoid receptor antagonism with mifepristone should be considered to control the effects of hypercortisolism and to improve quality of life.

sleep problems are frequent in young children; however, children vary in the degree to which they are affected by poor sleep quality. we investigated whether a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene, which is linked to emotional function, is a potential moderator of the influences of sleep duration on infant temperament using longitudinal data. we examined the interactive effects of average sleep duration between 6 and 36 months of age and the 5-httlpr genotype on negative emotionality/behavioral dysregulation at 36 months in 209 children recruited into a longitudinal birth cohort study. triallelic genotyping of 5-httlpr was performed by looking at slc6a4 genotype, focusing on the serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region (5-httlpr) including the snp polymorphism (rs23351). child sleep habits were assessed with a maternal self-report questionnaire. after controlling for demographics and both previous and concurrent maternal depression, multiple linear regression analyses revealed a significant interaction effect of average sleep duration for the first 3 years of life and 5-httlpr genotype on child negative emotionality/behavioral dysregulation such that the effects were exclusive to those with low-expressing 5-httlpr genotypes. the results suggest differential susceptibility to the effect of sleep duration early in life, which reiterates that the short allele of the 5-httlpr represents a marker of increased environmental sensitivity regarding emotional development. differential susceptibility theory posits that certain factors may increase an individual's susceptibility to the environment, in either a positive or negative fashion.

previous studies have shown an association between prematurity and attention- abstract deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd). results concerning late preterm infants are controversial, and studies examining fetal growth represented by weight for gestational age are scarce. our objective was to examine the association between gestational age by each week of fetal maturity, weight for gestational age, and adhd. in this population-based study, 10 321 patients with adhd, diagnosed according to the international classification of diseases and 38 355 controls individually matched for gender, date and place of birth, were identified from finnish nationwide registers. perinatal data were obtained from the finnish medical birth register. conditional logistic regression was used to examine the association between gestational age, weight for gestational age, and adhd after controlling for confounding factors. the risk of adhd increased by each declining week of gestation. the associations were robust after adjusting for confounders. an elevated risk also was seen among late preterm and early term infants. as for fetal growth, the odds ratio showed a u-shaped curve with an increased risk seen when the weight for gestational age was 1 sd below and 2 sd above the mean. our findings suggest that each gestational week has significance for child's subsequent neurodevelopment and risk for adhd. we also showed that poor fetal growth increased the risk of adhd. this highlights the importance of taking into account both prematurity and poor fetal growth when planning the timing of birth as well as later follow-up and support policies.

late preterm infants (lpis) (gestation 34 weeks and 0 days to 36 weeks and 6 days) compared with full-term infants (ftis) are at increased risk for mortality and short- and long-term morbidity. the objective of this study was to assess the neurodevelopmental outcomes in a longitudinal cohort study of lpis from infancy to school age and determine predictive values of earlier developmental testing compared with school-age testing. we used general estimating equations to calculate the odds of school readiness in a nationally representative cohort of 4900 full-term and 950 late preterm infants. we generated positive and negative predictive values of the ability of the 24-month mental developmental index (mdi) scores of the bayley short form, research edition, to predict total school readiness score (tsrs) at kindergarten age. in multivariable analysis, late preterm infants had higher odds of worse tsrss (adjusted odds ratio 1.52 [95% confidence interval 1.06-2.18], p = .0215). the positive predictive value of a child having an mdi of <70 at 24 months and a tsrs <5% at kindergarten was 10.4%. the negative predictive value of having an mdi of >70 at 24 months and a tsrs >5% was 96.8%. most infants improved score ranking over the study interval. lpis continue to be delayed at kindergarten compared with ftis. the predictive validity of having a tsrs in the bottom 5% given a mdi <70 at 24 months was poor. a child who tested within the normal range (>85) at 24 months had an excellent chance of testing in the normal range at kindergarten.

in recent years, there have been significant advancements in our understanding of acute kidney injury (aki) and its impact on outcomes across medicine. research based on single-center cohorts suggests that neonatal aki is very common and associated with poor outcomes. in this state-of-the-art review on neonatal aki, we highlight the unique aspects of neonatal renal physiology, definition, risk factors, epidemiology, outcomes, evaluation, and management of aki in neonates. the changes in renal function with gestational and chronologic age are described. we put forth and describe the neonatal modified kidney diseases: improving global outcomes aki criteria and provide the rationale for its use as the standardized definition of neonatal aki. we discuss risk factors for neonatal aki and suggest which patient populations may warrant closer surveillance, including neonates <1500 g, infants who experience perinatal asphyxia, near term/ term infants with low apgar scores, those treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and those requiring cardiac surgery. we provide recommendations for the evaluation and treatment of these patients, including medications and renal replacement therapies. we discuss the need for long-term follow-up of neonates with aki to identify those children who will go on to develop chronic kidney disease. this review highlights the deficits in our understanding of neonatal aki that require further investigation. in an effort to begin to address these needs, the neonatal kidney collaborative was formed in 2014 with the goal of better understanding neonatal aki, beginning to answer critical questions, and improving outcomes in these vulnerable populations. 

to examine the risk of mortality and major morbidities in extremely preterm multiple gestation infants compared with singletons over time. this is a retrospective study of 15,402 infants born ≤27 weeks' gestation, admitted to nicus in the australian and new zealand neonatal network from 1995 to 2009. mortality and major morbidities were compared between singletons and multiples across three 5-year epochs. extreme preterm multiples were more likely to have lower birth weight; higher maternal age; and higher rates of assisted conception, antenatal steroid use, and cesarean delivery compared with singletons. the mortality rate was significantly higher in multiples compared with singletons even as there was a trend of decreasing gestational-age stratified mortality in multiples over the time period investigated. the rates of major morbidities or composite adverse outcomes were not different between multiples and singletons across all epochs. the adjusted odds ratio (aor) for mortality in multiples was significantly higher in multiples compared with singletons (aor 1.20, 95% confidence interval [ci] 1.08-1.34). there were no differences in the adjusted odds for poor outcomes in multiples compared with singletons in the most recent epoch: mortality (aor 1.00, 95% ci 0.84-1.19), major morbidity (0.95, 95% ci 0.81-1.10), and composite adverse outcome (0.96, 95% ci 0.83-1.11). over the 15-year period, the odds for mortality in extremely preterm nicu infants of multiple gestation was significantly higher compared with singletons. the adjusted odds of poor outcomes in multiples were not significantly different from that of singletons in the most recent epoch.

poor health in adolescence has the potential to disrupt education and employment pathways. this study is the first systematic review of the literature examining education and employment outcomes in adulthood of poor adolescent mental and physical health. we conducted searches using a standardized search protocol in 8 electronic databases: psycinfo, medline, embase, eric, british education index, australian education index, social sciences citation index, and cinahl plus. we identified studies that longitudinally compared adult education and employment outcomes of those with an adolescent chronic condition of clinical severity with healthy controls. we conducted meta-analyses using odds ratios (for dichotomous variables) and cohen's d (for continuous variables) as our main summary statistics. we identified 27 studies incorporating 70 relevant analyses. our meta-analyses suggested that overall, poor health in adolescence was associated with poorer education and employment outcomes in adulthood. however, evidence was much stronger for mental health conditions than for physical health conditions, for which less evidence was available and mixed findings emerged. compared with mental health conditions, we identified few studies investigating the long-term outcomes of physical health conditions. age and follow-up times varied considerably across our studies, which potentially resulted in some heterogeneity in effect sizes. the majority of included studies were conducted in the united states, raising questions about the generalizability of the results internationally. health in adolescence contributes to adult attainment and life chances. the results suggest that investment in health may improve life chances and that policy interventions may improve outcomes for those with adolescent chronic conditions.

diphtheria is a rare cause of infection in highly vaccinated populations and may not be recognized by modern clinicians. infections by nontoxigenic corynebacterium diphtheriae are emerging. we report the first case of necrotizing epiglottitis secondary to nontoxigenic c diphtheriae. a fully vaccinated child developed fever, poor oral intake, and sore throat and was found to have necrotizing epiglottitis. necrotizing epiglottitis predominantly occurs in the immunocompromised host. laboratory evaluation revealed pancytopenia, and bone marrow biopsy was diagnostic for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. clinicians should be aware of aggressive infections that identify immunocompromised patients. this case highlights the features of a reemerging pathogen, c diphtheriae. 

isoniazid has been the backbone of tuberculosis chemotherapy for 6 decades. resistance to isoniazid threatens the efficacy of treatment of tuberculosis disease and infection. to inform policies around treatment of tuberculosis disease and infection in children, we sought to estimate both the proportion of child tuberculosis cases with isoniazid resistance and the number of incident isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis cases in children, by region. we determined the relationship between rates of isoniazid resistance among child cases and among treatment-naive adult cases through a systematic literature review. we applied this relationship to regional isoniazid resistance estimates to estimate proportions of childhood tuberculosis cases with isoniazid resistance. we applied these proportions to childhood tuberculosis incidence estimates to estimate numbers of children with isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis. we estimated 12.1% (95% confidence interval [ci] 9.8% to 14.8%) of all children with tuberculosis had isoniazid-resistant disease, representing 120,872 (95% ci 96,628 to 149,059) incident cases of isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis in children in 2010. the majority of these occurred in the western pacific and southeast asia regions; the european region had the highest proportion of child tuberculosis cases with isoniazid resistance, 26.1% (95% ci: 20.0% to 33.6%). the burden of isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis in children is substantial, and risk varies considerably by setting. the large number of child cases signals extensive ongoing transmission from adults with isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis. the risk of isoniazid resistance must be considered when evaluating treatment options for children with disease or latent infection to avoid inadequate treatment and consequent poor outcomes.

few prospective studies have systematically evaluated the extent of recovery from incident acquired demyelinating syndromes (ads) of the central nervous system in children. in a national cohort study of pediatric ads, severity of the incident attack and extent of recovery by 12 months were evaluated. annual evaluations were used to determine current diagnoses (monophasic ads or multiple sclerosis [ms]) and new deficits. of 283 children, 244 (86%) required hospitalization for a median (interquartile range [iqr]) of 6 (3-10) days, and 184 had moderate or severe deficits; 41 children were profoundly encephalopathic, 129 were unable to ambulate independently, and 59 with optic neuritis (on) had moderately or severely impaired vision. those with transverse myelitis (tm) and patients with monophasic disease were more likely to have moderate or severe deficits at onset. twenty-seven children (10%) did not experience full neurologic recovery from their incident attack; 12 have severe residual deficits. monophasic illness, tm, and moderate or severe deficits at onset were associated with poor recovery. after a median (iqr) follow-up of 5.06 (3.41-6.97) years, 59 children (21%) were diagnosed with ms; all recovered fully from their incident ads attacks, although 6 subsequently acquired irreversible deficits after a median (iqr) observation period of 5.93 (4.01-7.02) years. ads is a serious illness, with 86% of affected canadian children requiring hospitalization. more than 90% of children recovered physically from their ads event, including those children experiencing onset of ms. however, permanent visual or spinal cord impairment occurred in some children with on or tm.

early psychosocial exposures are increasingly recognized as being crucial to health throughout life. a possible mechanism could be physiologic dysregulation due to stress. cortisol in hair is a new biomarker assessing long-term hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity. the objective was to investigate whether early-life adverse psychosocial circumstances influence infant cortisol levels in hair and health outcomes in children prospectively until age 10. a cohort study in the general community using a questionnaire covering 11 psychosocial items in the family during pregnancy and the cumulative incidence of diagnoses until age 10 years in 1876 children. cortisol levels in hair were measured by using a radioimmunoassay in those with sufficient hair samples at age 1, yielding a subsample of n = 209. children with added psychosocial exposures had higher infant cortisol levels in hair (b = 0.40, p < .0001, adjusted for gender and size for gestational age) in a cumulative manner and were significantly more often affected by 12 of the 14 most common childhood diseases, with a general pattern of increasing odds ratios. the findings support the model of physiologic dysregulation as a plausible mechanism by which the duration and number of early detrimental psychosocial exposures determine health outcomes. the model indicates that the multiplicity of adversities should be targeted in future interventions and could help to identify children who are at high risk of poor health. furthermore, given the prolonged nature of exposure to a stressful social environment, the novel biomarker of cortisol in hair could be of major importance.

pediatric patients commonly have difficulty swallowing pills. targeted interventions have shown to improve medication administration and treatment compliance. the objective was to evaluate studies performed on pill swallowing interventions in the pediatric population since 1987. we performed a comprehensive pubmed search and a bibliography review to identify articles for our review. we selected articles published in english between december 1986 and december 2013 that included >10 participants aged 0 to 21 years with pill swallowing difficulties without a comorbid condition affecting their swallowing. reviewers extracted the relevant information and rated the quality of each study as "poor," "fair," or "good" based on the sample size and study design. we identified 4 cohort studies and 1 case series that met our criteria. all 5 studies found their intervention to be successful in teaching children how to swallow pills. interventions included behavioral therapies, flavored throat spray, verbal instructions, specialized pill cup, and head posture training. quality ratings differed between the articles, with 3 articles rated as "fair," 1 article as "good," and 1 article as "poor." pill swallowing difficulties are a barrier that can be overcome with a variety of successful interventions. addressing this problem and researching more effective ways of implementing these interventions can help improve medication administration and compliance in the pediatric population.

simulation-based skill trainings are common; however, optimal instructional designs that improve outcomes are not well specified. we explored the impact of just-in-time and just-in-place training (jipt) on interns' infant lumbar puncture (lp) success. this prospective study enrolled pediatric and emergency medicine interns from 2009 to 2012 at 34 centers. two distinct instructional design strategies were compared. cohort a (2009-2010) completed simulation-based training at commencement of internship, receiving individually coached practice on the lp simulator until achieving a predefined mastery performance standard. cohort b (2010-2012) had the same training plus jipt sessions immediately before their first clinical lp. main outcome was lp success, defined as obtaining fluid with first needle insertion and <1000 red blood cells per high-power field. process measures included use of analgesia, early stylet removal, and overall attempts. a total of 436 first infant lps were analyzed. the lp success rate in cohort a was 35% (13/37), compared with 38% (152/399) in cohort b (95% confidence interval for difference [ci diff], -15% to +18%). cohort b exhibited greater analgesia use (68% vs 19%; 95% ci diff, 33% to 59%), early stylet removal (69% vs 54%; 95% ci diff, 0% to 32%), and lower mean number of attempts (1.4 ± 0.6 vs 2.1 ± 1.6, p < .01) compared with cohort a. across multiple institutions, intern success rates with infant lp are poor. despite improving process measures, adding jipt to training bundles did not improve success rate. more research is needed on optimal instructional design strategies for infant lp.

folate and vitamin b-12 are important for growth. many children in low- and middle-income countries have inadequate intakes of these nutrients. we undertook a randomized, placebo controlled double-blind trial in 1000 north indian children, 6 to 35 months of age, providing twice the recommended daily allowance of folic acid and/or vitamin b-12, or placebo, daily for 6 months. by using a factorial design, we allocated children in a 1:1:1:1 ratio in blocks of 16. we measured the effect of giving vitamin b-12, folic acid, or the combination of both on linear and ponderal growth. we also identified predictors for growth in multiple linear regression models and effect modifiers for the effect of folic acid or vitamin b-12 supplementation on growth. the overall effect of either of the vitamins was significant only for weight; children who received vitamin b-12 increased their mean weight-for-age z scores by 0.07 (95% confidence interval: 0.01 to 0.13). weight-for-age z scores and height-for-age z scores increased significantly after vitamin b-12 supplementation in wasted, underweight, and stunted children. these subgrouping variables significantly modified the effect of vitamin b-12 on growth. vitamin b-12 status at baseline predicted linear and ponderal growth in children not receiving vitamin b-12 supplements but not in those who did (p-interaction < .001). we provide evidence that poor vitamin b-12 status contributes to poor growth. we recommend studies with larger doses and longer follow-up to confirm our findings.

extremely preterm (ep; <28 weeks) birth and extremely low birth weight (elbw; <1000 g) are risk factors for poor cognitive outcomes, including in executive function (ef; higher-order cognitive skills necessary for goal-directed, adaptive functioning and important for academic and behavioral-emotional outcomes). we aimed to (1) extend the limited data on ef in ep/elbw survivors in adolescence compared with normal birth weight controls, and (2) determine changes in ef between ages 8 and 17 years in both groups. two hundred twenty-eight ep/elbw and 166 control adolescents (mean age, 17 years) from a prospective geographical cohort were assessed with multiple ef tasks, and parent- and self-ratings of behavioral ef. the rey complex figure and behavior rating inventory of executive function parent report were also administered at age 8 years, enabling examination of change in scores between childhood and adolescence. ep/elbw adolescents performed more poorly than controls in verbal processing speed, attentional control, cognitive flexibility, and goal-setting (effect sizes, -0.7 to -0.2 sd), but not psychomotor reaction time. group differences were of similar magnitude across tasks. from childhood to late adolescence, ep/elbw children improved their accuracy of the rey complex figure copy more than controls. according to parents, executive behaviors were largely stable over time in both groups. adolescents born ep/elbw have poorer ef skills across multiple domains than controls. from childhood to late adolescence, different aspects of ef improved, but others did not, underscoring the need for multidomain, longitudinal assessments in this high-risk population.

rheumatic heart disease (rhd) remains a major public health concern in developing countries, and routine screening has the potential to improve outcomes. standard portable echocardiography (stand) is far more sensitive than auscultation for the detection of rhd but remains cost-prohibitive in resource-limited settings. handheld echocardiography (hand) is a lower-cost alternative. the purpose of this study was to assess the incremental value of hand over auscultation to identify rhd. rhd screening was completed for schoolchildren in gulu, uganda, by using stand performed by experienced echocardiographers. any child with mitral or aortic regurgitation or stenosis plus a randomly selected group of children with normal stand findings underwent hand and auscultation. stand and hand studies were interpreted by 6 experienced cardiologists using the 2012 world heart federation criteria. sensitivity and specificity of hand and auscultation for the detection of rhd and pathologic mitral or aortic regurgitation were calculated by using stand as the gold standard. of 4773 children who underwent screening with stand, a subgroup of 1317 children underwent hand and auscultation. auscultation had uniformly poor sensitivity for the detection of rhd or valve disease. sensitivity was significantly improved by using hand compared with auscultation for the detection of definite rhd (97.8% vs 22.2%), borderline or definite rhd (78.4% vs 16.4%), and pathologic aortic insufficiency (81.8% vs 13.6%). auscultation alone is a poor screening test for rhd. hand significantly improves detection of rhd and may be a cost-effective screening strategy for rhd in resource-limited settings.

outcomes for children with special health care needs (shcn) can vary by their patterns and persistence over time. we aimed to empirically establish typical shcn trajectories throughout childhood and their predictive relationships with child and parent outcomes. the 2 cohorts of the nationally representative longitudinal study of australian children were recruited in 2004 at ages 0 to 1 (n = 5107, b cohort) and 4 to 5 years (n = 4983, k cohort). the parent-reported children with shcn screener (short form) was completed at each of 4 biennial waves. wave 4 outcomes were parent-reported behavior and health-related quality of life, teacher-reported learning, and directly assessed cognition. both parents self-reported mental distress. we derived intracohort trajectories by using latent class analysis in mplus. we compared mean outcome scores across trajectories by using linear regression, adjusting for socioeconomic position. four distinct shcn trajectories were replicated in both cohorts: persistent (b 6.8%, k 8.7%), emerging (b 4.1%, k 11.5%), transient (b 7.9%, k 4.2%), and none (b 81.3%, k 75.6%). every outcome was adversely affected except fathers' mental health. from infancy to age 6 to 7 years, the persistent and emerging groups had similarly poor outcomes. from age 4 and 5 to 10 and 11 years, outcomes were incrementally poorer on moving from none to transient to emerging and to persistent shcn. effect sizes were largest for behavior, learning, and psychosocial outcomes. adverse outcomes are shaped more by cumulative burden than point prevalence of shcns. in addition to providing care according to a child's need at any given time, prioritizing care toward persistent shcns may have the biggest benefits for children and parents.

blood culture is the gold standard to diagnose bloodstream infection but is usually time-consuming. prediction models aim to facilitate early preliminary diagnosis and treatment. we systematically reviewed prediction models for health care-associated bloodstream infection (habsi) in neonates, identified superior models, and pooled clinical predictors. libhub, pubmed, and web of science. the studies included designed prediction models for laboratory-confirmed habsi or sepsis. the target population was a consecutive series of neonates with suspicion of sepsis hospitalized for ≥ 48 hours. clinical predictors had to be recorded at time of or before culturing. methodologic quality of the studies was assessed. data extracted included population characteristics, total suspected and laboratory-confirmed episodes and definition, clinical parameter definitions and odds ratios, and diagnostic accuracy parameters. the systematic search revealed 9 articles with 12 prediction models representing 1295 suspected and 434 laboratory-confirmed sepsis episodes. models exhibit moderate-good methodologic quality, large pretest probability range, and insufficient diagnostic accuracy. random effects meta-analysis showed that lethargy, pallor/mottling, total parenteral nutrition, lipid infusion, and postnatal corticosteroids were predictive for habsi. post hoc analysis with low-gestational-age neonates demonstrated that apnea/bradycardia, lethargy, pallor/mottling, and poor peripheral perfusion were predictive for habsi. limitations include clinical and statistical heterogeneity. prediction models should be considered as guidance rather than an absolute indicator because they all have limited diagnostic accuracy. lethargy and pallor and/or mottling for all neonates as well as apnea and/or bradycardia and poor peripheral perfusion for very low birth weight neonates are the most powerful clinical signs. however, the clinical context of the neonate should always be considered.

child well-being is important for lifelong health and well-being. although there is a robust evidence base linking social determinants of health (eg, relative poverty and income inequality) to child well-being, social and public health policy tends to focus on interventions to mitigate their effects, rather than remove the root causes. the goal of this study was to examine associations between child well-being and income inequality. we compared reported rates of childhood well-being in the 2007 and 2013 unicef reports on child well-being in wealthy countries. twenty indicators of child well-being (excluding child poverty) were defined consistently in both the 2007 and 2013 reports. these variables were used to create an indicator of change in child well-being over the approximate decade 2000 to 2010. for our analyses of income inequality, we used the organization for economic cooperation and development gini coefficient of income inequality for 2009 and change between 2000 and 2009, respectively. the overall index of child well-being in 2013 was closely and negatively correlated with income inequality (r = -0.60, p = .004) but not with average income (r = -0.3460, p = .12). adjustment for income inequality, children in relative poverty, and the child poverty gap did not change the lack of association between average income and child well-being in 2013 in wealthy countries. between 2000 and 2010, child well-being scores improved most in italy, norway, portugal, the united kingdom, and germany. the biggest declines were seen in sweden, canada, japan, switzerland, and france. countries that experienced the largest increases in income inequality had significantly greater declines in child well-being (r = -0.51, p = .02). children born into socioeconomically disadvantaged families suffer worse child well-being and its lifelong implications, in all societies, worldwide. our analyses show, however, that some wealthy societies are able to mitigate these inequalities; these societies have better child well-being, on average. this outcome has less to do with specific welfare policies or targeted interventions for poor children than to a societal commitment to greater equality.

concern over childhood obesity has generated a decade-long reformation of school nutrition policies. food is available in school in 3 venues: federally sponsored school meal programs; items sold in competition to school meals, such as a la carte, vending machines, and school stores; and foods available in myriad informal settings, including packed meals and snacks, bake sales, fundraisers, sports booster sales, in-class parties, or other school celebrations. high-energy, low-nutrient beverages, in particular, contribute substantial calories, but little nutrient content, to a student's diet. in 2004, the american academy of pediatrics recommended that sweetened drinks be replaced in school by water, white and flavored milks, or 100% fruit and vegetable beverages. since then, school nutrition has undergone a significant transformation. federal, state, and local regulations and policies, along with alternative products developed by industry, have helped decrease the availability of nutrient-poor foods and beverages in school. however, regular access to foods of high energy and low quality remains a school issue, much of it attributable to students, parents, and staff. pediatricians, aligning with experts on child nutrition, are in a position to offer a perspective promoting nutrient-rich foods within calorie guidelines to improve those foods brought into or sold in schools. a positive emphasis on nutritional value, variety, appropriate portion, and encouragement for a steady improvement in quality will be a more effective approach for improving nutrition and health than simply advocating for the elimination of added sugars. 

language barriers are associated with poor health care outcomes, and barriers exist for timely in-person interpretation. although available on-demand, telephonic interpretation remains underutilized. this study evaluates whether a quality improvement (qi) intervention was associated with rates of interpretation and parent-reported language service use at a children's hospital. the qi intervention was developed by a multidisciplinary team and included provider education, electronic alerts, standardized dual-handset telephones, and 1-touch dialing in all hospital rooms. interpreter use was tracked for 12 months before, 5 months during, and 12 months after the intervention. weekly rates of interpretation per limited english proficient (lep) patient-day were evaluated by using segmented linear regression. lep parents were surveyed about professional interpretation and delays in care. responses before, during, and after the intervention were compared by using the χ(2) test for trend. telephonic interpretation rates increased by 53% after the intervention (baseline 0.38 per patient-day, increased 0.20 [0.13-0.28]). overall (telephonic and in-person) interpretation increased by 54% (baseline 0.96, increased by 0.51 [0.38-0.64]). parent-reported interpreter use improved, including more frequent use of professional interpreters (53.3% before, 71.8% during, 69.3% after, p trend = .001), less frequent use of ad hoc interpreters (52.4% before, 38.1% during, 41.4% after, p trend = .03), and fewer interpretation-related delays in care (13.3% before, 7.9% during, 6.0% after, p trend = .01). this qi intervention was associated with increased telephonic interpreter use and improved parent-reported use of professional language services. this is a promising approach to deliver safe, timely, and equitable care for the growing population of lep children and families.

poor school outcomes for children in out-of-home placement (ohp) raise concerns about the adequacy of child welfare and educational policy for this vulnerable population. we analyzed the relation between ohp and academic achievement, focusing on reading and math achievement in grades 3 through 8. linked administrative data were used for our analytic sample comprising 529 597 child-year observations for 222 049 children who experienced ohp or were in a comparison group. three models were estimated: a pooled ordinary least squares regression that considered placement status and test scores net of the full set of control variables; an identical model that added the previous year's test scores as an additional control; and a final model that included child-specific fixed effects. children in ohp settings had achievement test scores at least 0.6 sd below average. however, we found similar deficits across children with past, current, and future exposure to ohp and, in our preferred model, ohp (past, current, or future placement) had no statistically discernible relation with either reading or math achievement. ohp by itself is not significantly related to school achievement; however, evidence reveals consistently low average math and reading achievement among children involved with child protective services.

without adequate support, adolescents transitioning from the pediatric to the adult health care system are at increased risk for poor health outcomes. numerous interventions attempt to improve this transition, yet few comprehensively evaluate efficacy. to advance evaluation methods and ultimately the quality of transition services, it is necessary to understand the current state of health care transition measurement. this study examines and categorizes transition measures by using the "triple aim" framework of experience of care, population health, and cost of care. ovid medline and the cumulative index to nursing and allied health literature were searched for articles published between 1995 and 2013. two reviewers independently screened studies and included those that evaluated the impact of a health care transition intervention. measures were subsequently classified according to population health, experience of care, and costs of care. of the 2282 studies initially identified, 33 met inclusion criteria. population health measures were used in 27 studies, with disease-specific measures collected most frequently. fifteen studies measured cost, most often service utilization. eight studies measured experience of care, with satisfaction assessed most commonly. only 3 studies examined all 3 domains of the "triple aim." transition interventions described in the gray literature were not reviewed. transition programs are inconsistently evaluated in terms of their impact on population health, patient experience, and cost. to demonstrate improvement in the transition from pediatric to adult health care, a more robust and consistent set of measures is needed.

it is unknown whether inequalities in under-5 mortality by wealth in low- and middle-income countries (lmics) are growing or declining. all demographic and health surveys conducted between 2002 and 2012 were used to measure under-5 mortality trends in 3 wealth tertiles. two approaches were used to estimate changes in under-5 mortality: within-survey changes from all 54 countries, and between-survey changes for 29 countries with repeated survey waves. the principal outcome measures include annual decline in mortality, and the ratio of mortality between the poorest and least-poor wealth tertiles. mortality information in 85 surveys from 929 224 households and 1 267 167 women living in 54 countries was used. in the subset of 29 countries with repeat surveys, mortality declined annually by 4.36, 3.36, and 2.06 deaths per 1000 live births among the poorest, middle, and least-poor tertiles, respectively (p = .031 for difference). the mortality ratio declined from 1.68 to 1.48 during the study period (p = .006 for trend). in the complete set of 85 surveys, the mortality ratio declined in 64 surveys (from 2.11 to 1.55), and increased in 21 surveys (from 1.58 to 1.88). multivariate analyses suggest that convergence was associated with good governance (p ≤ .03 for 4 governance indicators: government effectiveness, rule of law, regulatory quality, and control of corruption). overall, under-5 mortality in low- and middle-income countries has decreased faster among the poorest compared with the least poor between 1995 and 2012, but progress in some countries has lagged, especially with poor governance.

perinatal complications predict increased risk for morbidity and early mortality. evidence of perinatal programming of adult mortality raises the question of what mechanisms embed this long-term effect. we tested a hypothesis related to the theory of developmental origins of health and disease: that perinatal complications assessed at birth predict indicators of accelerated aging by midlife. perinatal complications, including both maternal and neonatal complications, were assessed in the dunedin multidisciplinary health and development study cohort (n = 1037), a 38-year, prospective longitudinal study of a representative birth cohort. two aging indicators were assessed at age 38 years, objectively by leukocyte telomere length (tl) and subjectively by perceived facial age. perinatal complications predicted both leukocyte tl (β = -0.101; 95% confidence interval, -0.169 to -0.033; p = .004) and perceived age (β = 0.097; 95% confidence interval, 0.029 to 0.165; p = .005) by midlife. we repeated analyses with controls for measures of family history and social risk that could predispose to perinatal complications and accelerated aging, and for measures of poor health taken in between birth and the age-38 follow-up. these covariates attenuated, but did not fully explain the associations observed between perinatal complications and aging indicators. our findings provide support for early-life developmental programming by linking newborns' perinatal complications to accelerated aging at midlife. we observed indications of accelerated aging "inside," as measured by leukocyte tl, an indicator of cellular aging, and "outside," as measured by perceived age, an indicator of declining tissue integrity. a better understanding of mechanisms underlying perinatal programming of adult aging is needed.

we aimed to determine the timing and size of the cognitive deficit associated with poverty in the first 5 years of life and to examine the role of parental characteristics, pre- and postnatal growth, and stimulation in the home in bangladeshi children. we hypothesized that the effect of poverty on cognition begins in infancy and is mainly mediated by these factors. we enrolled 2853 singletons, a subsample from a pregnancy supplementation trial in a poor rural area. we assessed mental development at 7, 18, and 64 months; anthropometry at birth, 12, 24, and 64 months; home stimulation at 18 and 64 months; and family's socioeconomic background. in multiple regression analyses, we examined the effect of poverty at birth on iq at 64 months and the extent that other factors mediated the effect. a mean cognitive deficit of 0.2 (95% confidence interval -0.4 to -0.02) z scores between the first and fifth wealth quintiles was apparent at 7 months and increased to 1.2 (95% confidence interval -1.3 to -1.0) z scores of iq by 64 months. parental education, pre- and postnatal growth in length, and home stimulation mediated 86% of the effects of poverty on iq and had independent effects. growth in the first 2 years had larger effects than later growth. home stimulation had effects throughout the period. effects of poverty on children's cognition are mostly mediated through parental education, birth size, growth in the first 24 months, and home stimulation in the first 5 years.

giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (gch-aha) is a rare autoimmune disease of infancy characterized by severe liver disease associated with coombs-positive hemolytic anemia. we recently showed that gch-aha is probably caused by a humoral immune mechanism. such data support the use of rituximab, an anti-cd-20 monoclonal antibody specifically targeting b lymphocytes, as a treatment for gch-aha. we describe here the detailed clinical evolution of 4 children with gch-aha who showed a complete response to rituximab. all patients shared a severe course of the disease with poor control on standard and aggressive immunosuppression. rituximab was well tolerated, and no side effects or infections were registered. several doses were needed to induce remission, and 5 to 11 additional maintenance injections were necessary in the 2 more severe cases. weaning from corticosteroids was achieved in all subjects. a steroid-sparing effect was noted in the 3 children who started rituximab early in the course of the disease. overall, we show here that there is a strong rationale for treating gch-aha with rituximab. early treatment could reduce the use of corticosteroids. nevertheless, short-term steroids should be initially associated with rituximab to account for autoantibodies' half-life. repeated injections are needed to treat and prevent relapses, but the best frequency and duration of treatment remain to be defined. 

parental perceptions of child's weight status may influence family readiness to foster healthy behaviors. this study investigated the generational shifting of parental perceptions about children's weight. data were collected in the nhanes 1988-1994 (n = 2871) and 2005-2010 (n = 3202). parents, mainly mothers, were asked whether they considered their child, ages 6 to 11 years, to be overweight, underweight, or just about the right weight. the centers for disease control and prevention 2000 growth chart was used for reference. we ran poisson regression to estimate the probability ratio between the 2 surveys for parents perceiving their child as overweight after controlling for actual weight. the 10th percentile of bmi z scores for children who were parentally perceived as overweight shifted with statistical significance from 84th percentile of reference population in the early survey to 91st percentile of reference population in the recent survey (p < .05). the mean z score of children parentally perceived as overweight also increased between surveys with the largest increase among children from poor families (from 1.60 [se: 0.20] to 1.98 [0.08], p < .05), followed by african americans (from 1.65 [0.09] to 2.02 [0.05], p < .05). the probability of overweight/obese children being correctly perceived as overweight by the parents declined by 24% between surveys (probability ratio = 0.76 [95% confidence interval: 0.67-0.87]). overweight/obese children were less likely to be perceived as overweight in the recent survey compared with peers of similar weight but surveyed 10+ years earlier. the declining tendency among parents to perceive overweight children appropriately may indicate a generational shift in social norms related to body weight.

to elucidate the role of gestational age in determining the risk of poor developmental outcomes among children born late preterm (34-36 weeks) and early term (37-38 weeks) versus full term (39-41 weeks) by examining the contribution of gestational age to these outcomes in the context of proximal social processes. this was an analysis of the canadian national longitudinal survey of children and youth. developmental outcomes were examined at 2 to 3 (n= 15099) and 4 to 5 years (n= 12302). the sample included singletons, delivered at 34 to 41 weeks, whose respondents were their biological mothers. multivariable modified poisson regression was used to directly estimate adjusted relative risks (arrs). we assessed the role of parenting by using moderation analyses. in unadjusted analyses, children born late preterm appeared to have greater risk for developmental delay (relative risk = 1.26; 95% confidence interval [ci], 1.01 to 1.56) versus full term. in adjusted analyses, results were nonsignificant at 2 to 3 years (late preterm arr = 1.13; 95% ci, 0.90 to 1.42; early term arr = 1.11; 95% ci, 0.96 to 1.27) and 4 to 5 years (late preterm arr = 1.06; 95% ci, 0.79 to 1.43; early term arr = 1.03; 95% ci, 0.85 to 1.25). parenting did not modify the effect of gestational age but was a strong predictor of poor developmental outcomes. our findings show that, closer to full term, social factors (not gestational age) may be the most important influences on development.

sleep disturbance is common in patients with atopic dermatitis (ad). however, studies have largely been questionnaire-based, and the pathophysiology remains unclear. the aims of this study were to determine objective characteristics of sleep disturbance in children with ad and explore contributing factors and clinical predictors. sleep parameters were measured by actigraphy and polysomnography in 72 patients with ad and 32 controls ages 1 to 18 years. urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin levels, serum cytokines, and total and allergen-specific immunoglobulin e (ige) levels were also measured. the patients with ad had significantly reduced sleep efficiency, longer sleep onset latency, more sleep fragmentation, and less nonrapid eye movement sleep. results from actigraphy correlated well with those from polysomnography. the ad disease severity was associated with sleep disturbance (r = 0.55-0.7), and a scoring atopic dermatitis index of ≥48.7 predicted poor sleep efficiency with a sensitivity of 83.3% and a specificity of 75% (area under the curve = 0.81, p = .001). lower nocturnal melatonin secretion was significantly associated with sleep disturbance in the patients with ad. other correlates of sleep disturbance included pruritus, scratching movements, higher total serum ige levels, and allergic sensitization to dust mite and staphylococcal enterotoxins. poor sleep efficiency is common in children with ad and can be predicted by the scoring atopic dermatitis index. melatonin and ige might play a role in the sleep disturbance. further studies are required to explore the mechanisms and clinical implications, and actigraphy could serve as a useful evaluating tool.

current assessments of adverse childhood experiences (aces) may not adequately encompass the breadth of adversity to which low-income urban children are exposed. the purpose of this study was to identify and characterize the range of adverse childhood experiences faced by young adults who grew up in a low-income urban area. focus groups were conducted with young adults who grew up in low-income philadelphia neighborhoods. using the nominal group technique, participants generated a list of adverse childhood experiences and then identified the 5 most stressful experiences on the group list. the most stressful experiences identified by participants were grouped into a ranked list of domains and subdomains. participants identified a range of experiences, grouped into 10 domains: family relationships, community stressors, personal victimization, economic hardship, peer relationships, discrimination, school, health, child welfare/juvenile justice, and media/technology. included in these domains were many but not all of the experiences from the initial aces studies; parental divorce/separation and mental illness were absent. additional experiences not included in the initial aces but endorsed by our participants included single-parent homes; exposure to violence, adult themes, and criminal behavior; personal victimization; bullying; economic hardship; and discrimination. gathering youth perspectives on childhood adversity broadens our understanding of the experience of stress and trauma in childhood. future work is needed to determine the significance of this broader set of adverse experiences in predisposing children to poor health outcomes as adults.

there has been an overall improvement in survival rates for persons with cancer over the past 35 years. however, these gains are less prevalent among adolescents with cancer aged 15 to 19 years, which may be due to lower clinical trial enrollment among adolescents with cancer. we conducted a literature review to assess current research regarding clinical trial enrollment and subsequent outcomes among adolescents with cancer. the search included english-language publications that reported original data from january 1985 to october 2011. the search identified 539 records. of these 539 records, there were 30 relevant original research articles. multiple studies reported that adolescents with cancer are enrolled in clinical trials at lower rates compared with younger children and older adults. treatment setting, physician type, and institution type may all be factors in the low enrollment rate among adolescents. few data focused solely on adolescents, with many studies combining adolescents with young adults. the number of available studies related to this topic was limited, with significant variability in study design, methods, and outcomes. this literature review suggests that adolescents with cancer are not treated at optimal settings and are enrolled in clinical trials at low rates. this may lead to inferior treatment and poor subsequent medical and psychosocial outcomes. the scarcity in data further validates the need for additional research focusing on this population.

adolescents (aged 15-19 years) have not experienced the same survival gains as children and older adults diagnosed with cancer. poor clinical trial enrollment and adherence rates among adolescents may account for some of this disparity. although biological, regulatory, systemic, and practice-related challenges to clinical trial enrollment and adherence have been examined, studies of psychosocial factors, which can serve as barriers or facilitators to enrollment and adherence, are limited. to bring attention to these psychological factors, we reviewed existing literature on psychosocial barriers and facilitators that can affect an adolescent's decision to enroll and adhere to a clinical trial. we also provide potential strategies to address psychosocial factors affecting clinical trial accrual and adherence. 

sleep is important to child development, but there is limited understanding of individual developmental patterns of sleep, their underlying determinants, and how these influence health and well-being. this article explores the presence of various sleep patterns in children and their implications for health-related quality of life. data were collected from the longitudinal study of australian children. participants included 2926 young children followed from age 0 to 1 years to age 6 to 7 years. data on sleep duration were collected every 2 years, and covariates (eg, child sleep problems, maternal education) were assessed at baseline. growth mixture modeling was used to identify distinct longitudinal patterns of sleep duration and significant covariates. linear regression examined whether the distinct sleep patterns were significantly associated with health-related quality of life. the results identified 4 distinct sleep duration patterns: typical sleepers (40.6%), initially short sleepers (45.2%), poor sleepers (2.5%), and persistent short sleepers (11.6%). factors such as child sleep problems, child irritability, maternal employment, household financial hardship, and household size distinguished between the trajectories. the results demonstrated that the trajectories had different implications for health-related quality of life. for instance, persistent short sleepers had poorer physical, emotional, and social health than typical sleepers. the results provide a novel insight into the nature of child sleep and the implications of differing sleep patterns for health-related quality of life. the findings could inform the development of effective interventions to promote healthful sleep patterns in children.

cystic fibrosis (cf) is a common life-shortening genetic disease and is associated with poor psychosocial and quality of life outcomes. the objective of this study was to describe the experiences and perspectives of children and adolescents with cf to direct care toward areas that patients regard as important. medline, embase, psycinfo, and cumulative index to nursing and allied health literature were searched from inception to april 2013. we used thematic synthesis to analyze the findings. forty-three articles involving 729 participants aged from 4 to 21 years across 10 countries were included. we identified 6 themes: gaining resilience (accelerated maturity and taking responsibility, acceptance of prognosis, regaining control, redefining normality, social support), lifestyle restriction (limited independence, social isolation, falling behind, physical incapacity), resentment of chronic treatment (disempowerment in health management, unrelenting and exhausting therapy, inescapable illness), temporal limitations (taking risks, setting achievable goals, valuing time), emotional vulnerability (being a burden, heightened self-consciousness, financial strain, losing ground, overwhelmed by transition), and transplant expectations and uncertainty (confirmation of disease severity, consequential timeliness, hope and optimism). adolescents and children with cf report a sense of vulnerability, loss of independence and opportunities, isolation, and disempowerment. this reinforces the importance of the current model of multidisciplinary patient-centered care that promotes shared decision-making, control and self-efficacy in treatment management, educational and vocational opportunities, and physical and social functioning, which can lead to optimal treatment, health, and quality of life outcomes.

to examine the incidence, duration, and clinical course of individual post-concussive symptoms in patients presenting to a pediatric emergency department (ed) with a concussion. we conducted secondary analysis of a prospective cohort study of patients 11 to 22 years old presenting to the ed of a children's hospital with an acute concussion. the main outcome measure was duration of symptoms, assessed by the rivermead post-concussion symptoms questionnaire (rpsq). patients initially completed a questionnaire describing mechanism of injury, associated symptoms, past medical history, and the rpsq, then were serially administered the rpsq for 3 months after the concussion or until all symptoms resolved. headache, fatigue, dizziness, and taking longer to think were the most common symptoms encountered at presentation, whereas sleep disturbance, frustration, forgetfulness, and fatigue were the symptoms most likely to develop during the follow-up period that had not initially been present. median duration of symptoms was the longest for irritability (16 days), sleep disturbance (16 days), frustration (14 days), and poor concentration (14 days), whereas nausea, depression, dizziness, and double-vision abated most quickly. one month after injury, nearly a quarter of children still complained of headache, >20% suffered from fatigue, and nearly 20% reported taking longer to think. among patients presenting to a pediatric ed after a concussion, physical symptoms such as headache predominate immediately after the injury, emotional symptoms tend to develop later in the recovery period, and cognitive symptoms may be present throughout.

television and insufficient sleep are associated with poor mental and physical health. this study assessed associations of tv viewing and bedroom tv with sleep duration from infancy to midchildhood. we studied 1864 children in project viva. parents reported children's average daily tv viewing and sleep (at 6 months and annually from 1-7 years) and the presence of a bedroom tv (annually 4-7 years). we used mixed effects models to assess associations of tv exposures with contemporaneous sleep, adjusting for child age, gender, race/ethnicity, maternal education, and income. six hundred forty-three children (35%) were racial/ethnic minorities; 37% of households had incomes ≤$70 000. from 6 months to 7 years, mean (sd) sleep duration decreased from 12.2 (2.0) hours to 9.8 (0.9) hours per day; tv viewing increased from 0.9 (1.2) hours to 1.6 (1.0) hours per day. at 4 years, 17% had a bedroom tv, rising to 23% at 7 years. each 1 hour per day increase in lifetime tv viewing was associated with 7 minutes per day (95% confidence interval [ci]: 4 to 10) shorter sleep. the association of bedroom tv varied by race/ethnicity; bedroom tv was associated with 31 minutes per day shorter sleep (95% ci: 16 to 45) among racial/ethnic minority children, but not among white, non-hispanic children (8 fewer minutes per day [95% ci: -19 to 2]). more tv viewing, and, among racial/ethnic minority children, the presence of a bedroom tv, were associated with shorter sleep from infancy to midchildhood.

few studies have demonstrated improvement in adherence to pediatric advanced life support guidelines for severe sepsis and septic shock. we sought to improve adherence to national guidelines for children with septic shock in a pediatric emergency department with poor guideline adherence. prospective cohort study of children presenting to a tertiary care pediatric emergency department with septic shock. quality improvement (qi) interventions, including repeated plan-do-study-act cycles, were used to improve adherence to a 5-component sepsis bundle, including timely (1) recognition of septic shock, (2) vascular access, (3) administration of intravenous (iv) fluid, (4) antibiotics, and (5) vasoactive agents. the intervention focused on iv fluid delivery as a key driver impacting bundle adherence, and adherence was measured using statistical process control methodology. two-hundred forty-two patients were included: 126 subjects before the intervention (november 2009 to march 2011), and 116 patients during the qi intervention (october 2011 to may 2013). we achieved 100% adherence for all metrics, including (1) administration of 60 ml/kg iv fluid within 60 minutes (increased from baseline adherence rate of 37%), (2) administration of vasoactive agents within 60 minutes (baseline rate of 35%), and (3) 5-component bundle adherence (baseline rate of 19%). improvement was sustained over 9 months. the number of septic shock cases between each death from this condition increased after implementation of the qi intervention. using qi methodology, we have demonstrated improved adherence to national guidelines for severe sepsis and septic shock.

this multiorganizational literature review was undertaken to provide an evidence base for determining whether recommendations for out-of-hospital termination of resuscitation could be made for children who are victims of traumatic cardiopulmonary arrest. although there is increasing acceptance of out-of-hospital termination of resuscitation for adult traumatic cardiopulmonary arrest when there is no expectation of a good outcome, children are routinely excluded from state termination-of-resuscitation protocols. the decision to withhold resuscitative efforts in a child under specific circumstances (decapitation or dependent lividity, rigor mortis, etc) is reasonable. if there is any doubt as to the circumstances or timing of the traumatic cardiopulmonary arrest, under the current status of limiting termination of resuscitation in the field to persons older than 18 years in most states, resuscitation should be initiated and continued until arrival to the appropriate facility. if the patient has arrested, resuscitation has already exceeded 30 minutes, and the nearest facility is more than 30 minutes away, involvement of parents and family of these children in the decision-making process with assistance and guidance from medical professionals should be considered as part of an emphasis on family-centered care because the evidence suggests that either death or a poor outcome is inevitable. 

to examine the relation between county-level income inequality and rates of child maltreatment. data on substantiated reports of child abuse and neglect from 2005 to 2009 were obtained from the national child abuse and neglect data system. county-level data on income inequality and children in poverty were obtained from the american community survey. data for additional control variables were obtained from the american community survey and the health resources and services administration area resource file. the gini coefficient was used as the measure of income inequality. generalized additive models were estimated to explore linear and nonlinear relations among income inequality, poverty, and child maltreatment. in all models, state was included as a fixed effect to control for state-level differences in victim rates. considerable variation in income inequality and child maltreatment rates was found across the 3142 us counties. income inequality, as well as child poverty rate, was positively and significantly correlated with child maltreatment rates at the county level. controlling for child poverty, demographic and economic control variables, and state-level variation in maltreatment rates, there was a significant linear effect of inequality on child maltreatment rates (p < .0001). this effect was stronger for counties with moderate to high levels of child poverty. higher income inequality across us counties was significantly associated with higher county-level rates of child maltreatment. the findings contribute to the growing literature linking greater income inequality to a range of poor health and well-being outcomes in infants and children.

sixteen years ago, the 105th congress, responding to the needs of 10 million children in the united states who lacked health insurance, created the state children's health insurance program (schip) as part of the balanced budget act of 1997. enacted as title xxi of the social security act, the children's health insurance program (chip; or schip as it has been known at some points) provided states with federal assistance to create programs specifically designed for children from families with incomes that exceeded medicaid thresholds but that were insufficient to enable them to afford private health insurance. congress provided $40 billion in block grants over 10 years for states to expand their existing medicaid programs to cover the intended populations, to erect new stand-alone schip programs for these children, or to effect some combination of both options. congress reauthorized chip once in 2009 under the children's health insurance program reauthorization act and extended its life further within provisions of the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010. the purpose of this statement is to review the features of chip as it has evolved over the 16 years of its existence; to summarize what is known about the effects that the program has had on coverage, access, health status, and disparities among participants; to identify challenges that remain with respect to insuring this group of vulnerable children, including the impact that provisions of the new affordable care act will have on the issue of health insurance coverage for near-poor children after 2015; and to offer recommendations on how to expand and strengthen the national commitment to provide health insurance to all children regardless of means. 

asthma is the most common chronic disease of childhood. treatment adherence by adolescents is often poor, and their outcomes are worse than those of younger patients. we conducted a quality improvement initiative to improve asthma control and outcomes for high-risk adolescents treated in a primary care setting. interventions were guided by the chronic care model and focused on standardized and evidence-based care, care coordination and active outreach, self-management support, and community connections. patients with optimally well-controlled asthma increased from ∼10% to 30%. patients receiving the evidence-based care bundle (condition/severity characterized in chart and, for patients with persistent asthma, an action plan and controller medications at the most recent visit) increased from 38% to at or near 100%. patients receiving the required self-management bundle (patient self-assessment, stage-of-readiness tool, and personal action plan) increased from 0% to ∼90%. patients and parents who were confident in their ability to manage their or their adolescent's asthma increased from 70% to ∼85%. patient satisfaction and the mean proportion of patients with asthma-related emergency department visits or hospitalizations remained stable at desirable levels. implementing interventions focused on standardized and evidence-based care, self-management support, care coordination and active outreach, linkage to community resources, and enhanced follow-up for patients with chronically not-well-controlled asthma resulted in sustained improvement in asthma control in adolescent patients. additional interventions are likely needed for patients with chronically poor asthma control.

little is known about how very low birth weight (vlbw) affects survival and morbidities among infants with trisomy 13 (t13) or trisomy 18 (t18). we examined the care plans for vlbw infants with t13 or t18 and compared their risks of mortality and neonatal morbidities with vlbw infants with trisomy 21 and vlbw infants without birth defects. infants with birth weight 401 to 1500 g born or cared for at a participating center of the eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network during the period 1994-2009 were studied. poisson regression models were used to examine risk of death and neonatal morbidities among infants with t13 or t18. of 52,262 vlbw infants, 38 (0.07%) had t13 and 128 (0.24%) had t18. intensity of care in the delivery room varied depending on whether the trisomy was diagnosed before or after birth. the plan for subsequent care for the majority of the infants was to withdraw care or to provide comfort care. eleven percent of infants with t13 and 9% of infants with t18 survived to hospital discharge. survivors with t13 or t18 had significantly increased risk of patent ductus arteriosus and respiratory distress syndrome compared with infants without birth defects. no infant with t13 or t18 developed necrotizing enterocolitis. in this cohort of liveborn vlbw infants with t13 or t18, the timing of trisomy diagnosis affected the plan for care, survival was poor, and death usually occurred early.

disparities in outcomes among adults with systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) have been documented. we investigated associations between sociodemographic factors and volume of annual inpatient hospital admissions with hospitalization characteristics and poor outcomes among patients with childhood-onset sle. by using the pediatric health information system, we analyzed admissions for patients aged 3 to <18 years at index admission with ≥ 1 international classification of diseases, ninth revision code for sle from january 2006 to september 2011. summary statistics and univariable analyses were used to examine demographic characteristics of hospital admissions, readmissions, and lengths of stay. we used multivariable logistic regression analyses, controlling for patient gender, age, race, ethnicity, insurance type, hospital volume, us census region, and severity of illness, to examine risk factors for poor outcomes. a total of 10,724 admissions occurred among 2775 patients over the study period. hispanic patients had longer lengths of stay, more readmissions, and higher in-hospital mortality. in multivariable analysis, african american race was significantly associated with icu admission. african american race and hispanic ethnicity were associated with end-stage renal disease and death. volume of patients with sle per hospital and hospital location were not significantly associated with outcomes. in this cohort of hospitalized children with sle, race and ethnicity were associated with outcomes. further studies are needed to elucidate the relationship between sociodemographic factors and poor outcomes in patients with childhood-onset sle.

sympathetic paragangliomas are rare catecholamine-secreting tumors of extra-adrenal origin, and their diagnosis in children is even more infrequent. they usually manifest as hypertension, palpitations, headache, sweating, and pallor. malignant paragangliomas are identified by the presence of metastasis. hemorrhagic stroke in the pediatric population is a life-threatening condition with several etiologies. we report here the case of a 12-year-old boy with malignant sympathetic paraganglioma presenting with hemorrhagic stroke. severe hypertension was found and the patient evolved into a coma. brain computed tomography scan showed right thalamus hemorrhage with intraventricular extension. after clinical improvement, further investigation revealed elevated catecholamine and metanephrine levels, and 2 abdominal tumors were identified by computed tomography. resection of both lesions was performed, and histologic findings were consistent with paraganglioma. multiple metastatic involvement of bones and soft tissues appeared several years later. genetic testing identified a mutation in succinate dehydrogenase subunit b gene, with paternal transmission. 131i-metaiodobenzylguanidine therapy was performed 3 times with no tumoral response. our patient is alive, with adequate quality of life, 25 years after initial diagnosis. to our knowledge, this is the first pediatric case of paraganglioma presenting with hemorrhagic stroke. intracerebral hemorrhage was probably caused by severe hypertension due to paraganglioma. therefore, we expand the recognized clinical spectrum of the disease. physicians evaluating children with hemorrhagic stroke, particularly if hypertension is a main symptom, should consider the possibility of catecholamine-secreting tumors. metastatic disease is associated with succinate dehydrogenase subunit b mutations and, although some patients have poor prognosis, progression can be indolent.

to examine the association between parental report of intimate partner violence (ipv) and parental psychological distress (ppd) with child attainment of developmental milestones. by using data collected from a large cohort of primary care patients, this cross-sectional study examined the relationship between parental report of ipv and/or ppd and the attainment of developmental milestones within the first 72 months of a child's life. multivariate logistic regression analyses were used to adjust for parental report of child abuse concern and sociodemographic characteristics. our study population included 16 595 subjects. children of parents reporting both ipv and ppd (n = 88; 0.5%) were more likely to fail at least 1 milestone across the following developmental domains: language (adjusted odds ratio [aor] 2.1; 95% confidence interval [ci] 1.3-3.3), personal-social (aor 1.9; 95% ci 1.2-2.9), and gross motor (aor 3.0; 95% ci 1.8-5.0). significant associations for those reporting ipv-only (n = 331; 2.0%) were found for language (aor 1.4; 95% ci 1.1-1.9), personal-social (aor 1.7; 95% ci 1.4-2.2), and fine motor-adaptive (aor 1.7; 95% ci 1.0-2.7). significant associations for those reporting ppd-only (n = 1920; 11.6%) were found for: language (aor 1.5; 95% ci 1.3-1.7), personal-social (aor 1.6; 95% ci 1.5-1.8), gross motor (aor 1.6; 95% ci 1.4-1.8), and fine-motor adaptive (aor 1.6; 95% ci 1.3-2.0). screening children for ipv and ppd helps identify those at risk for poor developmental outcomes who may benefit from early intervention.

to quantify microbial contamination of human milk purchased via the internet as an indicator of disease risk to recipient infants. cross-sectional sample of human milk purchased via a popular us milk-sharing web site (2012). individuals advertising milk were contacted to arrange purchase, and milk was shipped to a rented mailbox in ohio. the internet milk samples (n = 101) were compared with unpasteurized samples of milk donated to a milk bank (n = 20). most (74%) internet milk samples were colonized with gram-negative bacteria or had >10(4) colony-forming units/ml total aerobic count. they exhibited higher mean total aerobic, total gram-negative, coliform, and staphylococcus sp counts than milk bank samples. growth of most species was positively associated with days in transit (total aerobic count [log10 colony-forming units/ml] β = 0.71 [95% confidence interval: 0.38-1.05]), and negatively associated with number of months since the milk was expressed (β = -0.36 [95% confidence interval: -0.55 to -0.16]), per simple linear regression. no samples were hiv type 1 rna-positive; 21% of internet samples were cytomegalovirus dna-positive. human milk purchased via the internet exhibited high overall bacterial growth and frequent contamination with pathogenic bacteria, reflecting poor collection, storage, or shipping practices. infants consuming this milk are at risk for negative outcomes, particularly if born preterm or are medically compromised. increased use of lactation support services may begin to address the milk supply gap for women who want to feed their child human milk but cannot meet his or her needs.

the proven effectiveness of biologics and other immunomodulatory products in inflammatory rheumatic diseases has resulted in their widespread use as well as reports of potential short- and long-term complications such as infection and malignancy. these complications are especially worrisome in children who often have serial exposures to multiple immunomodulatory products. post-marketing surveillance of immunomodulatory products in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (jia) and pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus is currently based on product-specific registries and passive surveillance, which may not accurately reflect the safety risks for children owing to low numbers, poor long-term retention, and inadequate comparators. in collaboration with the us food and drug administration (fda), patient and family advocacy groups, biopharmaceutical industry representatives and other stakeholders, the childhood arthritis and rheumatology research alliance (carra) and the duke clinical research institute (dcri) have developed a novel pharmacosurveillance model (carra consolidated safety registry [core]) based on a multicenter longitudinal pediatric rheumatic diseases registry with over 8000 participants. the existing carra infrastructure provides access to much larger numbers of subjects than is feasible in single-product registries. enrollment regardless of medication exposure allows more accurate detection and evaluation of safety signals. flexibility built into the model allows the addition of specific data elements and safety outcomes, and designation of appropriate disease comparator groups relevant to each product, fulfilling post-marketing requirements and commitments. the proposed model can be applied to other pediatric and adult diseases, potentially transforming the paradigm of pharmacosurveillance in response to the growing public mandate for rigorous post-marketing safety monitoring. 

this study quantified professional athletes' endorsement of food and beverages, evaluated the nutritional quality of endorsed products, and determined the number of television commercial exposures of athlete-endorsement commercials for children, adolescents, and adults. one hundred professional athletes were selected on the basis of bloomberg businessweek's 2010 power 100 rankings, which ranks athletes according to their endorsement value and prominence in their sport. endorsement information was gathered from the power 100 list and the advertisement database adscope. endorsements were sorted into 11 endorsement categories (eg, food/beverages, sports apparel). the nutritional quality of the foods featured in athlete-endorsement advertisements was assessed by using a nutrient profiling index, whereas beverages were evaluated on the basis of the percentage of calories from added sugar. marketing data were collected from adscope and nielsen. of 512 brands endorsed by 100 different athletes, sporting goods/apparel represented the largest category (28.3%), followed by food/beverages (23.8%) and consumer goods (10.9%). professional athletes in this sample were associated with 44 different food or beverage brands during 2010. seventy-nine percent of the 62 food products in athlete-endorsed advertisements were energy-dense and nutrient-poor, and 93.4% of the 46 advertised beverages had 100% of calories from added sugar. peyton manning (professional american football player) and lebron james (professional basketball player) had the most endorsements for energy-dense, nutrient-poor products. adolescents saw the most television commercials that featured athlete endorsements of food. youth are exposed to professional athlete endorsements of food products that are energy-dense and nutrient-poor.

health care provider adherence to asthma guidelines is poor. the objective of this study was to assess the effect of interventions to improve health care providers' adherence to asthma guidelines on health care process and clinical outcomes. data sources included medline, embase, cochrane central register of controlled trials, cumulative index to nursing and allied health literature, educational resources information center, psycinfo, and research and development resource base in continuing medical education up to july 2012. paired investigators independently assessed study eligibility. investigators abstracted data sequentially and independently graded the evidence. sixty-eight eligible studies were classified by intervention: decision support, organizational change, feedback and audit, clinical pharmacy support, education only, quality improvement/pay-for-performance, multicomponent, and information only. half were randomized trials (n = 35). there was moderate evidence for increased prescriptions of controller medications for decision support, feedback and audit, and clinical pharmacy support and low-grade evidence for organizational change and multicomponent interventions. moderate evidence supports the use of decision support and clinical pharmacy interventions to increase provision of patient self-education/asthma action plans. moderate evidence supports use of decision support tools to reduce emergency department visits, and low-grade evidence suggests there is no benefit for this outcome with organizational change, education only, and quality improvement/pay-for-performance. decision support tools, feedback and audit, and clinical pharmacy support were most likely to improve provider adherence to asthma guidelines, as measured through health care process outcomes. there is a need to evaluate health care provider-targeted interventions with standardized outcomes.

we partnered with the salvation army to educate resource-poor families regarding childhood immunizations in an effort to improve vaccine coverage rates. eligibility for enrollment included children of families presenting at registration for our salvation army holiday gift program, available to families with an annual income <150% of federal poverty guidelines. parents completed a questionnaire, were provided each child's vaccination status as documented in the new york state immunization information system, and interacted with the study team to address immunization-related concerns. missed vaccines were identified and parents were directed to their child's medical home for necessary immunizations. vaccine coverage was ascertained via the new york state immunization information system every 6 to 8 weeks with telephone follow-up for children who remained delayed. the mcnemar test and standard 2-proportion comparison were used to determine confidence intervals when analyzing matched or independent data, respectively. a total of 1531 children were enrolled; 416 (28%) of the 1477 children with accurate immunization records were vaccine complete. when we excluded influenza vaccine, 1034 (70%) of children had received all other recommended vaccines. nine months later, vaccine completion rates increased from 28% to 45%, largely because of improvements in influenza vaccination rates, which increased by 17% (confidence interval [ci] 15.5-19.5), a significant improvement over county (8%, 95% ci 7.4-8.1) and statewide (5%, 95% ci 4.7-4.8) rates during the same period. immunization rates in poor children are suboptimal. partnering with community-based organizations to address parental concerns, provide education, and perform follow-up was effective in improving immunization rates, particularly for influenza vaccine.

to determine and compare attitudes, skills, and practices in childhood obesity management in 4 european countries with different obesity prevalence, health care systems, and economic situations. a cross-sectional survey was distributed to primary health care providers from france, italy, poland, and ukraine. the questionnaire was returned by 1119 participants with a response rate of 32.4%. the study revealed that most of the primary health care providers were convinced of their critical role in obesity management but did not feel sufficiently competent to perform effectively. the adherence to recommended practices such as routine weight and height measurements, bmi calculation, and plotting growth parameters on recommended growth charts was poor. most primary health care providers recognized the need for continuing professional education in obesity management, stressing the importance of appropriate dietary counseling. the study underlines insufficient implementation of national guidelines for management of obesity regardless of the country and its health system. it also makes clear that the critical problem is not elaboration of guidelines but rather creating support systems for implementation of the medical standards among the primary care practitioners.

preoperative imaging techniques may guide management of nonpalpable, cryptorchid testicles. we evaluated conventional mri for identifying and locating nonpalpable testicles in prepubescent boys via meta-analysis. databases including medline were searched from 1980 to february 2012. eligible studies included ≥10 boys with cryptorchidism/suspected cryptorchidism and reported data on testicular presence/absence and position (abdominal, inguinal, or scrotal) as determined by imaging and surgery. two investigators independently reviewed studies against inclusion criteria. we captured the number of testicles that were correctly and incorrectly identified and located, relative to surgically verified status, and estimated sensitivity and specificity by using a random-effects model. eight unique prospective case series included 171 boys with 193 nonpalpable testicles (22 with bilateral testicles). surgery identified 158 testicles (81.9%) present and 35 absent. mri correctly identified testicles with an estimated median sensitivity of 0.62 (95% bayesian credible interval [bci]: 0.47-0.77) and a specificity of 1.0 (95% bci: 0.99-1.0). mri located intraabdominal testicles with a sensitivity of 0.55 (95% bci: 0.09-1.0) and inguino-scrotal testicles with a sensitivity of 0.86 (95% bci: 0.67-1.0). we were not able to obtain estimates for mri sensitivity or specificity for locating atrophied testicles. the estimated specificity for location-specific testicles reached almost 100%. conventional mri has low sensitivity for estimating the population sensitivity for identifying the presence of nonpalpable cryptorchid testicles. when testicles are identified, mri is poor at locating both atrophied and intraabdominal testicles but performs modestly well in locating those in the inguino-scrotal regions.

controversy remains concerning the optimal treatment approach for cryptorchidism. the objective of this study was to assess effectiveness of hormone therapy or surgery for cryptorchidism. we searched medline and other databases from 1980 to february 2012. two reviewers independently assessed studies against predetermined criteria. two reviewers independently extracted data and assigned overall quality and strength of evidence ratings using predetermined criteria. fourteen studies addressed effectiveness of hormonal treatments, and 26 studies addressed surgical intervention outcomes. hormonal treatment is associated with testicular descent in some children, but rates generally do not exceed those seen with placebo by >10%. surgical treatment is associated with success rates of testicular descent ranging from 33% to 100%, depending on surgery. weighted success averages were 78.7% for 1-stage fowler-stephens (fs), 86% for 2-stage fs, and 96.4% for primary orchiopexy. descent rates were similar among studies comparing laparoscopic and open surgeries. reported harms of hormonal treatments were mild and transient. adverse effects specifically associated with surgical repair were rare. the body of the reviewed literature comprises primarily fair- and poor-quality studies, limiting our ability to draw definitive conclusions. hormonal treatment is marginally effective relative to placebo but is successful in some children and with minimal harms, suggesting that it may be an appropriate trial of care for some patients. surgical options are effective, with high rates of testicular descent (moderate strength of evidence for fs procedures, high for primary orchiopexy). comparable outcomes occur with laparoscopic and open approaches.

influenza immunization is recommended for children with ibd, however safety concerns may limit uptake. this study assessed whether immunization was associated with adverse events in ibd patients using a population-based database of children with ibd. all children <19 years diagnosed with ibd in ontario, canada between 1999-2009 were identified using health administrative data, and matched to non-ibd controls. self-controlled case series (sccs) analyses determined health services event rates (outpatient visits, hospitalizations and emergency visits) in any 2-week risk period to 180 days post-immunization compared to a no-risk control period. relative incidence (ri) was calculated for overall and ibd-related events and rates were compared between ibd cases and controls using relative incidence ratios (rir). a total of 4916 ibd patients were matched to 21 686 controls. ibd patients were more likely to have received immunization than controls (25.3% vs 13.2%, p < .001). no increased event rates existed in ibd cases during risk periods (pooled ri 0.95, 95% ci 0.84-1.07), including hospitalizations and emergency visits. there was a slightly higher event rate in ibd cases versus controls for days 3-14 (rir 1.60, 95% ci 1.05-2.44, p = .03). ibd-related visit rates were lower in risk periods compared to control period (pooled ri 0.81, 95% ci 0.68-0.96). there was no increase in health services use in the post-vaccine risk period in ibd patients, and there was evidence for a protective effect of influenza immunization against ibd-related health services use. influenza immunization is safe in children with ibd and should be encouraged to improve poor coverage rates.

treatment of the large patent ductus arteriosus (pda) in the setting of pulmonary hypertension (ph) is challenging. left patent, the large pda can result in irreversible pulmonary vascular disease. occlusion, however, may lead to right ventricular failure for certain patients with severe ph. our center has adopted a staged management strategy using medical management, noninvasive imaging, and invasive cardiac catheterization to treat ph in the presence of a large pda. this approach determines the safety of ductal closure but also leverages medical therapy to create an opportunity for safe pda occlusion. we reviewed our experience with this approach. patients with both severe ph and pdas were studied. ph treatment history and hemodynamic data obtained during catheterizations were reviewed. repeat catheterizations, echocardiograms, and clinical status at latest follow-up were also reviewed. seven patients had both ph and large, unrestrictive pdas. at baseline, all patients had near-systemic right ventricular pressures. nine catheterizations were performed. two patients underwent 2 catheterizations each due to poor initial response to balloon test occlusion. six of 7 patients exhibited subsystemic pulmonary pressures during test occlusion and underwent successful pda occlusion. one patient did not undergo pda occlusion. in follow-up, 2 additional catheterizations were performed after successful pda occlusion for subsequent hemodynamic assessment. at the latest follow-up, the 6 patients who underwent pda occlusion are well, with continued improvement in ph. five patients remain on ph treatment. a staged approach to pda closure for patients with severe ph is an effective treatment paradigm. aggressive treatment of ph creates a window of opportunity for pda occlusion, echocardiography assists in identifying the timing for closure, and balloon test occlusion during cardiac catheterization is critical in determining safety of closure. by safely eliminating the large pda, this treatment algorithm can halt the perilous combination of the large shunting from the pda and ph in a population at high risk of morbidity and mortality.

the most common adult chronic diseases affect 1 in 3 adults and account for more than three-quarters of us health care spending. the major childhood drivers of adult disease are distinctly nonmedical: poverty, poor educational outcomes, unhealthy social and physical environments, and unhealthy lifestyle choices. ideally, well-child care (wcc) would address these drivers and help create healthier adults with more productive lives and lower health care costs. for children without serious acute and chronic medical problems, however, traditional pediatric preventive services may be largely ineffective in addressing the outcomes that really matter; that is, improving lifelong health and reducing the burden of adult chronic disease. in this article, we examine what role wcc has in addressing the major childhood drivers of adult disease and consider various models for the future of wcc within pediatrics.

the us agency for healthcare research and quality sponsored a comparative effectiveness review of interventions for preschoolers at risk for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd). medline, cochrane central, embase, psycinfo, and education resources information center were searched from 1980 to november 24, 2011. selected studies were comparative, and enrolled children <6 years with clinically significant disruptive behavior, including adhd. the interventions evaluated were parent behavior training (pbt), combined home and school/day care interventions, and methylphenidate use. data were extracted by using customized software. two independent raters evaluated studies as good, fair, or poor by using the effective public health practice project quality assessment tool for quantitative studies risk of bias. overall strength of evidence (soe) was rated for each intervention's effectiveness, accounting for study design, systematic error, consistency of results, directness of evidence, and certainty regarding outcome. fifty-five studies were examined. only studies examining pbt interventions could be pooled statistically using meta-analysis. eight "good" studies examined pbt, total n = 424; soe was high for improved child behavior, standardized mean difference = -0.68 (95% confidence interval: -0.88 to -0.47), with minimal heterogeneity among studies. only 1 good study evaluated methylphenidate, total n = 114; therefore, soe for methylphenidate was low. combined home and school/day care interventions showed inconsistent results. the literature reported adverse effects for methylphenidate but not for pbt. with more studies consistently documenting effectiveness, pbt interventions have greater evidence of effectiveness than methylphenidate for treatment of preschoolers at risk for adhd.

youth with type 1 diabetes mellitus are at risk for poor glycemic control as they age into adulthood. the aim of this study was to describe sociodemographic and clinical correlates of poor glycemic control associated with the transfer of care from pediatric to adult diabetes providers among a cohort of youth with type 1 diabetes diagnosed in adolescence. analyses included 185 adolescent participants with recently diagnosed type 1 diabetes in the search for diabetes in youth study with pediatric care at baseline who were age ≥18 years at follow-up. demographic and clinical factors were measured by survey and laboratory results. survival analysis was used to estimate the age of transition. logistic regression analysis assessed the association of demographic and clinical factors with the transition of care and poor glycemic control at follow-up. fifty-seven percent of participants had transitioned to adult diabetes care providers by the follow-up visit. the estimated median age of transition of care was 20.1 years (95% confidence interval 19.8-20.4). older age, lower baseline glycosylated hemoglobin, and less parental education were independently associated with increased odds of transition. the odds of poor glycemic control at follow-up were 2.5 times higher for participants who transitioned to adult care compared with those who remained in pediatric care. transferring from pediatric to adult care, experienced by more than half the sample, was associated with an increased risk of poor glycemic control at follow-up. these findings suggest that young adults need additional support when moving to adult care.

we investigated the relationship between parental incarceration history and young adult physical and mental health outcomes using wave 1 and wave 4 data from the national longitudinal study of adolescent health. dependent variables included self-reported fair/poor health and health diagnoses. the independent variable was parental incarceration history. cross-tabulations and logistic regression models were run. positive, significant associations were found between parental incarceration and 8 of 16 health problems (depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, cholesterol, asthma, migraines, hiv/aids, and fair/poor health) in adjusted logistic regression models. those who reported paternal incarceration had increased odds of 8 mental and physical health problems, whereas those who reported maternal incarceration had increased odds of depression. for paternal incarceration, with the exception of hiv/aids, larger associations were found for mental health (odds ratios range 1.43-1.72) as compared with physical health (odds ratios range 1.26-1.31) problems. the association between paternal incarceration and hiv/aids should be interpreted with caution because of the low sample prevalence of hiv/aids. this study suggests exposure to parental incarceration in childhood is associated with health problems in young adulthood. extant literature suggests underlying mechanisms that link parental incarceration history to poor outcomes in offspring may include the lack of safe, stable, nurturing relationships and exposure to violence. to prevent poor health in offspring of the incarcerated, additional studies are needed to (1) confirm the aforementioned associations and (2) assess whether adverse experiences and violence exposure in childhood mediate the relationship between parental incarceration history and offspring health problems.

children with developmental disabilities often have unmet complex health care needs as well as significant physical and cognitive limitations. children with more severe conditions and from low-income families are particularly at risk with high dental needs and poor access to care. in addition, children with developmental disabilities are living longer, requiring continued oral health care. this clinical report describes the effect that poor oral health has on children with developmental disabilities as well as the importance of partnerships between the pediatric medical and dental homes. basic knowledge of the oral health risk factors affecting children with developmental disabilities is provided. pediatricians may use the report to guide their incorporation of oral health assessments and education into their well-child examinations for children with developmental disabilities. this report has medical, legal, educational, and operational implications for practicing pediatricians.

this statement revises a previous statement on screening of preterm infants for retinopathy of prematurity (rop) that was published in 2006. rop is a pathologic process that occurs only in immature retinal tissue and can progress to a tractional retinal detachment, which can result in functional or complete blindness. use of peripheral retinal ablative therapy by using laser photocoagulation for nearly 2 decades has resulted in a high probability of markedly decreasing the incidence of this poor visual outcome, but the sequential nature of rop creates a requirement that at-risk preterm infants be examined at proper times and intervals to detect the changes of rop before they become permanently destructive. this statement presents the attributes on which an effective program for detecting and treating rop could be based, including the timing of initial examination and subsequent reexamination intervals.

patients with relapsed stage 4 neuroblastoma have an extremely poor long-term prognosis, making the investigation of new agents of interest. we report the outcome of the first patient treated in a phase 1 study for relapsed neuroblastoma, using the chemotherapy agent decitabine to upregulate cancer testis antigen expression, followed by a dendritic cell vaccine targeting the cancer testis antigens mage-a1, mage-a3, and ny-eso-1. our patient had persistent tumor in his bone marrow after completion of standard therapy for neuroblastoma, including multiagent chemotherapy, tumor resection, stem cell transplantation, radiation therapy, and anti-gd2 monoclonal antibodies. his marrow disease persisted despite chemotherapy, which was given while the vaccine was being produced. after 3 cycles of decitabine and vaccine, this patient achieved a complete remission and is now 1 year from his last treatment, with no evidence of tumor in his bone marrow or other sites. this patient was noted to have an increase in mage-a3-specific t cells. this is the first report combining demethylating chemotherapy to enhance tumor antigen expression followed by a cancer antigen vaccine.

hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (hie) after perinatal asphyxia in term neonates causes long-term neurologic sequelae or death. a reliable evidence-based prognosis is essential. the study goal was to investigate the prognostic value of currently used clinical tests in neonatal patients with perinatal asphyxia and hie. searches were made on medline, embase, central, and cinahl for studies occurring between january 1980 and november 2011. studies were included if they (1) evaluated outcome in term infants with perinatal asphyxia and hie, (2) evaluated prognostic tests, and (3) reported outcome at a minimal follow-up age of 18 months. study selection, assessment of methodologic quality, and data extraction were performed by 3 independent reviewers. pooled sensitivities and specificities of investigated tests were calculated when possible. of the 259 relevant studies, 29 were included describing 13 prognostic tests conducted 1631 times in 1306 term neonates. a considerable heterogeneity was noted in test performance, cut-off values, and outcome measures. the most promising tests were amplitude-integrated electroencephalography (sensitivity 0.93, [95% confidence interval 0.78-0.98]; specificity 0.90 [0.60-0.98]), eeg (sensitivity 0.92 [0.66-0.99]; specificity 0.83 [0.64-0.93]), and visual evoked potentials (sensitivity 0.90 [0.74-0.97]; specificity 0.92 [0.68-0.98]). in imaging, diffusion weighted mri performed best on specificity (0.89 [0.62-0.98]) and t1/t2-weighted mri performed best on sensitivity (0.98 [0.80-1.00]). magnetic resonance spectroscopy demonstrated a sensitivity of 0.75 (0.26-0.96) with poor specificity (0.58 [0.23-0.87]). this evidence suggests an important role for amplitude-integrated electroencephalography, eeg, visual evoked potentials, and diffusion weighted and conventional mri. given the heterogeneity in the tests' performance and outcomes studied, well-designed large prospective studies are needed.

the medical home likely has a positive effect on outpatient outcomes for children with asthma. however, no information is available regarding the impact of medical home quality on health care utilization after hospitalizations. we sought to explore the relationship between medical home quality and readmission risk in children hospitalized for asthma exacerbations. we enrolled 601 children, aged 1 to 16 years, hospitalized for an acute asthma exacerbation at a single pediatric facility that captures >85% of all asthma admissions in an 8-county area. caregivers completed the parent's perception of primary care (p3c), a likert-based, validated survey. the p3c yields a total score of medical home quality and 6 subscale scores assessing continuity, access, contextual knowledge, comprehensiveness, communication, and coordination. asthma readmission events were prospectively collected via billing data. hazards of readmission were calculated by using cox proportional hazards adjusting for chronic asthma severity and key measures of socioeconomic status. overall p3c score was not associated with readmission. among the subscale comparisons, only children with lowest access had a statistically increased readmission risk compared with children with the best access. subgroup analysis revealed that children with private insurance and good access had the lowest rates of readmission within a year compared with other combinations of insurance and access. among measured aspects of medical home in a cohort of hospitalized children with asthma, having poor access to a medical home was the only measure associated with increased readmission. improving physician access for children with asthma may lower hospital readmission.

our aim was to describe the patient characteristics, clinical-epidemiological profile, and treatment outcome of childhood tuberculosis (tb). a retrospective, descriptive study was undertaken of 1212 children aged 0 to 18 years admitted to beijing children's hospital for the treatment of tb from january 2002 to december 2010. statistical significance of category variables was evaluated by using fisher's exact test. fifty-four percent of patients had extrapulmonary tuberculosis (eptb), 38.8% had tuberculous meningitis, and 31.3% had disseminated tb. the last 2 types were defined as severe tb. most patients with tb (81.6%) were cured or completed treatment. there were more patients aged <5 years and from rural areas with eptb than with pulmonary tuberculosis. more severe cases of tb were found in patients aged <1 year than other less severe types of tb. patients with no bacille calmette-guérin vaccination and a contact history at home had a significantly risk of contracting severe tb. children aged <1 year and those with severe tb were more likely to have poor treatment outcomes (failed to improve or died). among those with eptb, only 61.3% and 61.1% had positive results on the purified protein derivative tuberculin skin test and chest radiograph, respectively. in this referral hospital setting, more pediatric eptb and severe tb patients were found among children aged <1 year. age <1 year and having severe tb were risk factors for treatment failure. thus, prevention and health care in pediatric tb should focus on both eptb and severe tb.

the purpose of this study was to assess health-related quality of life (qol) in children with duchenne muscular dystrophy (dmd), including development and field-testing of a dmd-specific module integrated with the core pediatric quality of life inventory (pedsql). the pedsql 4.0 generic core and dmd module scales were completed by 203 families, including 200 parents and 117 boys with dmd. scores on the pedsql core scales were compared with those of matched healthy children. relationships between pedsql scores and patient characteristics were examined. by both parent report and child self-report, mean pedsql scores for boys with dmd were significantly lower than those for healthy children for physical and psychosocial qol (p < .0001), with significantly impaired psychosocial qol scores self-reported by 57%. psychosocial qol, by self-report only, tended to be higher in the older boys (13-18 years) than in younger boys (8-12 years; p = .05) and was not significantly associated with use of mobility aids. although parents reported higher daily activities scores in boys receiving steroids (p = .01), boys receiving steroids reported no difference in daily activities but significantly less worry (p = .004). parent-child concordance was generally in the fair to poor range. internal consistency reliability coefficients for pedsql dmd module scales ranged from 0.66 to 0.86. overall, boys with dmd reported significantly lower qol than their healthy peers. despite decreased physical functioning, older boys seem to perceive better psychosocial qol than perceived by their parents and by younger boys, unrelated to their need for mobility aids.

we reviewed the impact of hiv, hiv exposure, and antiretroviral therapy/prophylaxis on neurodevelopmental outcomes of hiv-infected and hiv-exposed-uninfected infants and children. a literature search of medline, embase, psychinfo, web of science, pubmed, and conference web sites (1990-march 2011) using the search terms, infant, child, hiv, neurodevelopment, cognition, language, and antiretroviral therapy, identified 31 studies of hiv/antiretroviral exposure using standardized tools to evaluate infant/child development as the main outcome. articles were included if results were reported in children <16 years of age who were exposed to hiv and antiretrovirals in fetal/early life, and excluded if children did not acquire hiv from their mothers or were not exposed to antiretrovirals in fetal/early life. infants who acquired hiv during fetal and early life tended to display poorer mean developmental scores than hiv-unexposed children. mean motor and cognitive scores were consistently 1 to 2 sds below the population mean. mean scores improved if the infant received treatment before 12 weeks and/or a more complex antiretroviral regimen. older hiv-infected children treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy demonstrated near normal global mean neurocognitive scores; subtle differences in language, memory, and behavior remained. hiv-exposed-uninfected children treated with antiretrovirals demonstrated subtle speech and language delay, although not universally. in comparison with resource-rich settings, hiv-infected and hiv-exposed-uninfected infants/children in resource-poor settings demonstrated greater neurodevelopmental delay compared with hiv-unexposed infants. the effects on neurodevelopment in older hiv-infected children commenced on antiretroviral therapy from an early age and hiv-exposed-uninfected children particularly in resource-poor settings remain unclear.

to assess associations of the number of parent stressors and parent-perceived stress with obesity and related behaviors in their children. this cross-sectional analysis used data from the 2006 southeastern pennsylvania household health survey in which 2119 parents/caregivers answered questions about themselves and their children (ages 3-17 years). survey data were used to assess the main exposure variables: the number of stressors (measured using a stressor index) and parent-perceived stress (the response to a general stress question); child covariates (age, race/ethnicity, health quality, and gender); adult covariates (education, bmi, gender, poor sleep quality) and study outcomes (child obesity, fast-food consumption, fruit and vegetable consumption, and physical activity). to account for developmental differences, analyses were also stratified by age group (3-5, 6-8, 9-12, and 13-17 years). analyses used multiple logistic regression, with results expressed as odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. the number of parent stressors was related to child obesity in unadjusted (1.12, 1.03-1.22, p = .007) and adjusted models (1.12, 1.03-1.23, p = .010). parent-perceived stress was related to fast-food consumption in unadjusted (1.07, 1.03-1.10, p < .001) and adjusted (1.06, 1.02-1.10, p < .001) models. the number of parent stressors was directly related to child obesity. parent-perceived stress was directly related to child fast-food consumption, an important behavioral indicator of obesity risk. clinical care models and future research that address child obesity should explore the potential benefits of addressing parent stressors and parent-perceived stress.

there is a documented connection between the home environment and health. medical-legal partnerships (mlps) can address social and environmental determinants of health. our objective was to describe a cluster of substandard housing identified and treated by an mlp based in a pediatric primary care setting. potential cases of poor-quality housing were identified during outpatient primary care. a case was defined as any rented housing unit with a reported unaddressed housing risk within a defined building portfolio (owned by a single developer) in which ≥ 1 child lived. an on-site mlp offered affected families legal services including ordinance enforcement and connection to resources. they also initiated portfolio-wide advocacy. legal advocates reported case outcomes. medical history and household demographics were collected from the medical record and compared with clinic-wide data by using fisher's exact test or χ(2) statistics. after identification of a single case, an additional 15 cases were identified. pest infestation was the most common initial risk identified. of 14 units with outcome data, repairs were completed in 10 (71%). of the 19 building complexes with the same owner, 11 received significant systemic repairs. of the 45 children living within the 16 identified case units, 36% had asthma, 33% had developmental delay or behavioral disorder, and 9% had an elevated lead level. affected children were more likely to have one of these diagnoses than the general clinic population (all p < .01). an mlp identified and improved home environmental conditions for children living in a cluster of substandard housing.

to evaluate prospectively the relationship between neurocardiogenic syncope (ncs) and depressive symptoms in pediatric patients. forty-five patients (aged 12.3 ± 2.9 years) with ncs (diagnosed as ≥ 1 syncopal episodes with typical symptoms, reproduced by tilt-table testing, in the absence of structural or primary electrical heart disease) were compared with 45 age- and gender-matched control subjects. assessment was performed at baseline and 2 years thereafter. depressive symptoms and self-perception profile of participants were evaluated, along with their parents' psychological distress, defensive profile and hostility. family cohesion and adaptability, as well as the opinion of parents and teachers on children's strengths and difficulties, were also examined. at baseline, patients showed more (p = .008) depressive symptoms than controls, correlating with the number of syncopal episodes, impaired relationship with parents and poor family cohesion. a conservative management strategy of ncs was adopted and psychological counseling was offered, focusing on patients with clinically significant depressive symptoms and their families. during follow-up, depressive symptoms decreased in patients (p < .001), but remained stable in controls. child-parent relationship, family cohesion and family adaptability improved at follow-up in patients. no recurrent syncope was noted during follow-up and this along with improvement in child-parent relationship were associated with depressive symptoms improvement. depressive symptomatology is common in pediatric patients with ncs. our findings call for additional investigation in larger controlled clinical interventional studies that will enhance understanding of the possible pathophysiological association between depressive symptomatology and ncs in pediatric populations.

poor growth is an indication for antiretroviral therapy (art) and a criterion for treatment failure. we examined variability in growth response to art in 12 programs in malawi, zambia, zimbabwe, mozambique, and south africa. treatment naïve children aged <10 years were included. we calculated weight for age z scores (wazs), height for age z scores (hazs), and weight for height z scores (whzs) up to 3 years after starting art, by using the world health organization standards. multilevel regression models were used. a total of 17990 children (range, 238-8975) were followed for 36181 person-years. at art initiation, most children were underweight (50%) and stunted (66%). lower baseline waz, haz, and whz were the most important determinants of faster catch-up growth on art. waz and whz increased rapidly in the first year and stagnated or reversed thereafter, whereas haz increased continuously over time. three years after starting art, waz ranged from -2.80 (95% confidence interval [ci]: -3.66 to -2.02) to -1.98 (95% ci: -2.41 to -1.48) in children with a baseline z score < -3 and from -0.79 (95% ci: -1.62 to 0.02) to 0.05 (95% ci: -0.42 to 0.51) in children with a baseline waz ≥ -1. for haz, the corresponding range was -2.33 (95% ci: -2.62 to -2.02) to -1.27 (95% ci: -1.58 to -1.00) for baseline haz < -3 and -0.24 (95% ci: -0.56 to 0.15) to 0.84 (95% ci: 0.53 to 1.16) for haz ≥ -1. despite a sustained growth response and catch-up growth in children with advanced hiv disease treated with art, normal weights and heights are not achieved over 3 years of art.

the prevalence of metabolic syndrome (mets) parallels the rise in childhood obesity. mets is associated with neurocognitive impairments in adults, but this is thought to be a long-term effect of poor metabolism. it would be important to ascertain whether these brain complications are also present among adolescents with mets, a group without clinically manifest vascular disease and relatively short duration of poor metabolism. forty-nine adolescents with and 62 without mets, matched on age, socioeconomic status, school grade, gender, and ethnicity, received endocrine, mri, and neuropsychological evaluations. adolescents with mets showed significantly lower arithmetic, spelling, attention, and mental flexibility and a trend for lower overall intelligence. they also had, in a mets-dose-related fashion, smaller hippocampal volumes, increased brain cerebrospinal fluid, and reductions of microstructural integrity in major white matter tracts. we document lower cognitive performance and reductions in brain structural integrity among adolescents with mets, thus suggesting that even relatively short-term impairments in metabolism, in the absence of clinically manifest vascular disease, may give rise to brain complications. in view of these alarming results, it is plausible that obesity-associated metabolic disease, short of type 2 diabetes mellitus, may be mechanistically linked to lower the academic and professional potential of adolescents. although obesity may not be enough to stir clinicians or even parents into action, these results in adolescents strongly argue for an early and comprehensive intervention. we propose that brain function be introduced among the parameters that need to be evaluated when considering early treatment of childhood obesity.

many individuals with autism spectrum disorders (asds) are approaching adolescence and young adulthood; interventions to assist these individuals with vocational skills are not well understood. this study systematically reviewed evidence regarding vocational interventions for individuals with asd between the ages of 13 and 30 years. the medline, psycinfo, and eric databases (1980-december 2011) and reference lists of included articles were searched. two reviewers independently assessed each study against predetermined inclusion/exclusion criteria. two reviewers independently extracted data regarding participant and intervention characteristics, assessment techniques, and outcomes, and assigned overall quality and strength of evidence ratings based on predetermined criteria. five studies were identified; all were of poor quality and all focused on on-the-job supports as the employment/vocational intervention. short-term studies reported that supported employment was associated with improvements in quality of life (1 study), asd symptoms (1 study), and cognitive functioning (1 study). three studies reported that interventions increased rates of employment for young adults with asd. few studies have been conducted to assess vocational interventions for adolescents and young adults with asd. as such, there is very little evidence available for specific vocational treatment approaches as individuals transition to adulthood. all studies of vocational approaches were of poor quality, which may reflect the recent emergence of this area of research. individual studies suggest that vocational programs may increase employment success for some; however, our ability to understand the overall benefit of supported employment programs is limited given the existing research.

the renal prognosis of patients with wilms' tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation syndrome (wagr) is poor. however, the renal histology and its mechanisms are not well understood. we performed renal biopsies in 3 patients with wagr syndrome who had heavy proteinuria. the complete deletion of one wt1 allele was detected in each patient by constitutional chromosomal deletion at 11p13 using g-banding, high-resolution g-banding, and fluorescence in situ hybridization. the patients exhibited proteinuria at the ages of 6, 10, and 6 years and were diagnosed as having focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (fsgs) at the ages of 7, 16 and 19 years, respectively. they exhibited normal or mildly declined renal function at the time of biopsy. re-examination of a nephrectomized kidney from 1 patient revealed that some glomeruli showed segmental sclerosis, although he did not have proteinuria at the time of nephrectomy. the other 2 patients did not develop wilms' tumor and thus did not undergo nephrectomy, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy, thereby eliminating any effect of these therapies on the renal histology. in conclusion, complete deletion of one wt1 allele may induce the development of fsgs. our findings suggest that haploinsufficiency of the wt1 could be responsible for the development of fsgs.

we examined the prevalence and correlates of postsecondary education and employment among youth with an autism spectrum disorder (asd). data were from a nationally representative survey of parents, guardians, and young adults with an asd. participation in postsecondary employment, college, or vocational education and lack of participation in any of these activities were examined. rates were compared with those of youth in 3 other eligibility categories: speech/language impairment, learning disability, and mental retardation. logistic regression was used to examine correlates of each outcome. for youth with an asd, 34.7% had attended college and 55.1% had held paid employment during the first 6 years after high school. more than 50% of youth who had left high school in the past 2 years had no participation in employment or education. youth with an asd had the lowest rates of participation in employment and the highest rates of no participation compared with youth in other disability categories. higher income and higher functional ability were associated with higher adjusted odds of participation in postsecondary employment and education. youth with an asd have poor postsecondary employment and education outcomes, especially in the first 2 years after high school. those from lower-income families and those with greater functional impairments are at heightened risk for poor outcomes. further research is needed to understand how transition planning before high school exit can facilitate a better connection to productive postsecondary activities.

pregnant adolescents face unique challenges. understanding the experiences, knowledge, and behaviors of adolescents during the pregnancy and postpartum periods may contribute to improvement of their maternity care. the purpose of this study was to compare the maternity experiences, knowledge, and behaviors of adolescent, young adult, and adult women by using a nationally representative sample. this study used data from the canadian maternity experiences survey (n = 6421). the weighted proportions of each variable were calculated by using survey sample weights. logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios. bootstrapping techniques were used to calculate variance estimates for prevalence and 95% confidence intervals. adolescents and young adults were more likely to experience physical abuse in the previous 2 years, initiate prenatal care late, not take folic acid before or during pregnancy, have poor prenatal health behaviors, have a lower cesarean delivery rate, have lower breastfeeding initiation and duration rates, experience more stressful life events, experience postpartum depression symptoms, and rate their infant's health as suboptimal than adult women. adolescents were more likely to rate their own health as suboptimal. adolescents have unique needs during pregnancy and postpartum. health care professionals should seek to provide care in a manner that acknowledges these needs.

effective health care for children must be based on thorough analyses of the best research evidence. the objective of this study was to examine registration, completeness, and publication of studies involving children. we searched the clinicaltrials.gov registry to identify all closed studies involving children and examined them for completeness and availability of results. we examined publication in peer-reviewed journals for 160 randomly selected national institutes of health (nih)-funded studies from 2000 through 2010 and for 758 randomly selected completed studies. of 3428 closed studies involving children identified in clinicaltrials.gov, 2385 (70%) were completed, 28 (0.8%) suspended, 152 (4.4%) terminated, and 38 (1.1%) withdrawn. the proportion of non-completed studies (terminated and suspended) increased linearly by 186% between 2001 and 2009, from 1.9% to 8.4%. of the 152 terminated studies, 48 did not report reasons for termination, 21 cited safety concerns, and 83 cited poor recruitment or other administrative reasons. only 29% of completed studies were published. publication that did occur was an average of 2 years after study completion. completed interventional studies were published more often than observational studies. completed industry-funded studies were published less often than studies funded by the nih. registered nih-funded trials were published more often than unregistered. results are unavailable for more than half of the studies involving children, revealing a substantial publication bias. registration and posting of results on clinicaltrials.gov should be mandatory for all studies involving children.

to explore the associations between probable developmental coordination disorder (dcd) defined at age 7 years and mental health difficulties at age 9 to 10 years. we analyzed of prospectively collected data (n = 6902) from the avon longitudinal study of parents and children. "probable" dcd was defined by using diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, fourth edition, text revision criteria as those children below the 15th centile of the avon longitudinal study of parents and children coordination test, with functional limitations in activities of daily living or handwriting, excluding children with neurologic difficulties or an iq <70. mental health was measured by using the child-reported short moods and feelings questionnaire and the parent-reported strengths and difficulties questionnaire. multiple logistic regression models, with the use of multiple imputation to account for missing data, assessed the associations between probable dcd and mental health difficulties. adjustments were made for environmental confounding factors, and potential mediating factors such as verbal iq, associated developmental traits, bullying, self-esteem, and friendships. children with probable dcd (n = 346) had an increased odds of self-reported depression, odds ratio: 2.08 (95% confidence interval: 1.36-3.19) and parent-reported mental health difficulties odds ratio: 4.23 (95% confidence interval: 3.10-5.77). the odds of mental health difficulties significantly decreased after accounting for verbal iq, social communication, bullying, and self-esteem. children with probable dcd had an increased risk of mental health difficulties that, in part, were mediated through associated developmental difficulties, low verbal iq, poor self-esteem, and bullying. prevention and treatment of mental health difficulties should be a key element of intervention for children with dcd.

the purpose was to explore whether poor parental psychological well-being is associated with behavioral problems of very low birth weight (vlbw, ≤1500 g) infants at 3 years of age. in this prospective cohort study, 189 vlbw preterm infants born between january 2001 and december 2006 at the turku university hospital, finland, were followed. validated questionnaires (beck depression inventory, parenting stress index, and sense of coherence scale) were mailed to the parents when their children were 2 years corrected age. a total of 140 parents evaluated the behavior of the child at 3 years by filling out the child behavior checklist. there were significant associations between most of the measures of parental symptoms of depression, parenting stress, and sense of coherence and the behavioral outcome of the vlbw infants. the concomitant symptoms of both parents were associated with more problematic child behavior. parents report more behavioral and emotional problems in vlbw children at age 3 if they themselves have had symptoms of depression, parenting stress, or weak sense of coherence 1 year earlier. the new finding of this study was to show the significance of the father's psychological well-being on the behavioral development of a preterm child.

vaccinating all children aged 6 months to 18 years every year has potentially large ramifications for office-based primary care pediatricians. we determined the degree to which pediatricians support routine annual influenza vaccination outside the medical home, especially in school-located mass influenza vaccination clinics. internet-based survey sent in may and june 2009 to all 623 currently practicing primary care general pediatricians who were members of the maryland chapter of the american academy of pediatrics. of those surveyed, 193 (31%) responded. approximately 67% reported they vaccinated more than half the children in their practice with at least one dose in the 2008-2009 influenza season, and about half anticipated that, in their office, they would not attain ≥75% coverage of all patients older than 5 months of age. approximately 27% of respondents predicted they would likely have difficulty obtaining sufficient vaccine to cover commercially insured patients, and 32% were likely to have difficulty getting sufficient vaccine to cover medicaid, underinsured, and uninsured patients because of ordering or distribution problems. approximately 78% of respondents cited borderline or poor reimbursement for influenza vaccinations, and 53% had unused vaccine at the end of the 2008-2009 influenza season. ninety-six percent of respondents supported school-located influenza vaccination programs in their community for their patients. these results indicate awareness by primary care pediatricians in maryland of the potential difficulties involved in implementing universal influenza vaccinations in their practice and their support of school-located vaccination programs managed by the local health department in their community.

(1) to document, at ages 8 to 10, children's perceptions of their future and, at ages 16 to 18, youth outcomes; and (2) to assess early childhood factors associated with trajectory-altering events (taes), defined as youth risk behaviors that may modify developmental trajectories. a prospective longitudinal study of 97 poor, inner-city, african american youth followed since birth who completed (1) early childhood environment, cognitive, and social-emotional evaluations, as well as an inventory at ages 8 to 10 of perceptions of their futures; and (2) evaluation for presence or absence of 4 taes documented at ages 16 to 18: drug use, adjudication, school failure, and teen parenthood. at age 9.4 ± 0.5, 94% of participants felt it unlikely they would try marijuana; 93% felt they were unlikely to get arrested; 92% felt they were likely to attend college or trade school; 81% did not know one could become pregnant with first-time sex. age 18.1 ± 0.8 outcomes showed that 33% had used drugs, 33% had been adjudicated, 19% had school failure, and 20% had become parents. fifty-six percent had ≥1 tae. no relationship was found between childhood perceptions and intentions and documented outcomes. odds of having a tae increased with greater exposure to violence and poorer home environment. young inner-city children are idealistic regarding their future. by ages 16 to 18 however, more than half of this cohort had a tae. factors most strongly associated with a tae were greater exposure to violence and poorer home environment.

abusive head trauma is a significant and tragic cause of morbidity and mortality in infants and its victims often have a poor prognosis. with such high rates of morbidity and mortality, health care providers and parents are often faced with the decision to continue or discontinue life support for an affected child. sadly, however, this decision becomes complicated when parents are accused of causing the victim-child's current state. in this situation, if life support is withdrawn, criminal charges for the accused may escalate from assault to murder. this escalation of legal charges creates a conflict of interest for accused parents. as a result, parents have a strong incentive to avoid murder charges by using their parental decision-making rights to keep the child alive, even when treatment is deemed futile or inhumane. in this article, we discuss the legal challenges health care providers may face when parents place their interest above their child's. we also propose solutions that give greater deference to the rights and interest of these critically ill children while still preserving protected parental rights.

school-based health centers (sbhcs) have become an important method of health care delivery for the youth of our nation. although they only represent 1 aspect of a coordinated school health program approach, sbhcs have provided access to health care services for youth confronted with age, financial, cultural, and geographic barriers. a fundamental principle of sbhcs is to create an environment of service coordination and collaboration that addresses the health needs and well-being of youth with health disparities or poor access to health care services. some pediatricians have concerns that these centers are in conflict with the primary care provider's medical home. this policy provides an overview of sbhcs and some of their documented benefits, addresses the issue of potential conflict with the medical home, and provides recommendations that support the integration and coordination of sbhcs and the pediatric medical home practice.

self-management of chronic pediatric conditions is a formidable challenge for patients, families, and clinicians, with research demonstrating a high prevalence of poor self-management and nonadherence across pediatric conditions. nevertheless, effective self-management is necessary to maximize treatment efficacy and clinical outcomes and to reduce unnecessary health care utilization and costs. however, this complex behavior is poorly understood as a result of insufficient definitions, reliance on condition-specific and/or adult models of self-management, failure to consider the multitude of factors that influence patient self-management behavior, and lack of synthesis of research, clinical practice, and policy implications. to address this need, we present a comprehensive conceptual model of pediatric self-management that articulates the individual, family, community, and health care system level influences that impact self-management behavior through cognitive, emotional, and social processes. this model further describes the relationship among self-management, adherence, and outcomes at both the patient and system level. implications for research, clinical practice, and health care policy concerning pediatric chronic care are emphasized with a particular focus on modifiable influences, evidence-based targets for intervention, and the role of clinicians in the provision of self-management support. we anticipate that this unified conceptual approach will equip stakeholders in pediatric health care to (1) develop evidence-based interventions to improve self-management, (2) design programs aimed at preventing the development of poor self-management behaviors, and (3) inform health care policy that will ultimately improve the health and psychosocial outcomes of children with chronic conditions.

to describe growth in moderately preterm-born children, determine the prevalence of growth restraint at the age of 4, and identify predictors of growth restraint. we hypothesized that growth in moderately preterm-born children differs from growth in term-born children and that growth restraint is more prevalent in those born prematurely. this was a community-based cohort study of 1123 children born moderately prematurely (gestational age [ga]: 32-35 6/7 weeks) between january 2002 and june 2003. on average, we found that moderately preterm-born children were shorter and weighed less at each assessment during the first 4 years of life than their term-born counterparts. thirty-two boys (5.6%) and 18 girls (3.8%) were growth-restricted in height, and 21 boys (3.4%) and 27 girls (5.8%) were growth-restricted in weight. their growth in head circumference was normal compared with term-born children. in addition, growth restraint was associated with being small for ga at birth (odds ratio [or] for height: 7.7 [95% confidence interval (ci): 2.9-20.4]; or for weight: 9.5 [95% ci: 3.9-23.1]) and maternal height below -1 sd (or for height: 4.9 [95% ci: 2.6-10.2]; or for weight: 2.6 [95% ci: 1.3-5.2]). poor head-circumference growth was associated with a low level of maternal education (or: 5.3 [95% ci: 1.4-20.8]). growth in moderately preterm-born children significantly differs from that of term-born children. predictors at birth are being small for ga, maternal height below -1 sd, and a low level of maternal education. the fact that growth in moderately preterm-born children may lag warrants close monitoring during routine practice. additional research on prevention of growth restraint is needed.

the introduction of pulse oximetry in clinical practice has allowed for simple, noninvasive, and reasonably accurate estimation of arterial oxygen saturation. pulse oximetry is routinely used in the emergency department, the pediatric ward, and in pediatric intensive and perioperative care. however, clinically relevant principles and inherent limitations of the method are not always well understood by health care professionals caring for children. the calculation of the percentage of arterial oxyhemoglobin is based on the distinct characteristics of light absorption in the red and infrared spectra by oxygenated versus deoxygenated hemoglobin and takes advantage of the variation in light absorption caused by the pulsatility of arterial blood. computation of oxygen saturation is achieved with the use of calibration algorithms. safe use of pulse oximetry requires knowledge of its limitations, which include motion artifacts, poor perfusion at the site of measurement, irregular rhythms, ambient light or electromagnetic interference, skin pigmentation, nail polish, calibration assumptions, probe positioning, time lag in detecting hypoxic events, venous pulsation, intravenous dyes, and presence of abnormal hemoglobin molecules. in this review we describe the physiologic principles and limitations of pulse oximetry, discuss normal values, and highlight its importance in common pediatric diseases, in which the principle mechanism of hypoxemia is ventilation/perfusion mismatch (eg, asthma exacerbation, acute bronchiolitis, pneumonia) versus hypoventilation (eg, laryngotracheitis, vocal cord dysfunction, foreign-body aspiration in the larynx or trachea). additional technologic advancements in pulse oximetry and its incorporation into evidence-based clinical algorithms will improve the efficiency of the method in daily pediatric practice.

to test the efficacy of irlen colored overlays for alleviating reading difficulties ostensibly caused by irlen syndrome, a proposed perceptual disorder with controversial diagnostic status. sixty-one schoolchildren (aged 7-12 years) with reading difficulties were assessed by an irlen diagnostician. we used a within-subject study design to examine differences in reading rate across 3 conditions: using an overlay of a prescribed color; using an overlay of a nonprescribed color; and using no overlay. in a subset of 44 children, all of whom had a diagnosis of irlen syndrome, we also used a between-group design to test the effects of irlen colored overlays on a global reading measure. the irlen diagnostician diagnosed irlen syndrome in 77% of our poor readers. we found no evidence for any immediate benefit of irlen colored overlays as measured by the reading-rate test or the global reading measure. our data suggest that irlen colored overlays do not have any demonstrable immediate effect on reading in children with reading difficulties.

internet-based developmental screening is being implemented in pediatric practices across the united states. little is known about the application of this technology in poor urban populations. we describe here the results of focus groups, surveys, and in-depth interviews during home visits with families served by an urban safety-net organization to address the question of whether it is possible to use internet or e-mail communication for medical previsit engagement in a population that is majority hispanic, of low socioeconomic status, and has many non-english-speaking families. this study included families in 4 clinics within a safety-net health care system. the study design included the use of (1) parental surveys (n = 200) of a convenience sample of parents whose children received primary care in the clinics, (2) focus groups (n = 7 groups) with parents, and (3) in-depth interviews during home visits with 4 families. we used χ(2) and multivariate analyses to compare internet access in english- and spanish-speaking families. standard qualitative methods were used to code focus-group texts and identify convergent themes. in multivariate analysis, independent factors associated with computer use were english versus spanish language (odds ratio: 3.2 [95% confidence interval: 1.4-6.9]) and education through at least high school (odds ratio: 4.7 [95% confidence interval: 2.3-9.7]). in focus groups, the concept of parental previsit work, such as developmental screening tests, was viewed favorably by all groups. however, many parents expressed reservations about doing this work by using the internet or e-mail and stated a preference for either paper or telephone options. many spanish-speaking families discussed lack of access to computers and printers. in this economically disadvantaged population, language and maternal education were associated with access to the internet. given the potential power of previsit work to tailor well-child visits to the needs of individual families, alternative strategies to using the internet should be explored for populations without reliable internet access.

the diagnosis and management of urinary tract infections (utis) in young children are clinically challenging. this report was developed to inform the revised, evidence-based, clinical guideline regarding the diagnosis and management of initial utis in febrile infants and young children, 2 to 24 months of age, from the american academy of pediatrics subcommittee on urinary tract infection. the conceptual model presented in the 1999 technical report was updated after a comprehensive review of published literature. studies with potentially new information or with evidence that reinforced the 1999 technical report were retained. meta-analyses on the effectiveness of antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent recurrent uti were performed. review of recent literature revealed new evidence in the following areas. certain clinical findings and new urinalysis methods can help clinicians identify febrile children at very low risk of uti. oral antimicrobial therapy is as effective as parenteral therapy in treating uti. data from published, randomized controlled trials do not support antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent febrile uti when vesicoureteral reflux is found through voiding cystourethrography. ultrasonography of the urinary tract after the first uti has poor sensitivity. early antimicrobial treatment may decrease the risk of renal damage from uti. recent literature agrees with most of the evidence presented in the 1999 technical report, but meta-analyses of data from recent, randomized controlled trials do not support antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent febrile uti. this finding argues against voiding cystourethrography after the first uti.

fetal cardiac intervention for critical aortic stenosis (as) with evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome is performed in an attempt to maintain a biventricular circulation postnatally. the procedure has been hindered by technical challenges and poor candidate selection. we report here the novel use of a pressure guidewire during aortic valvuloplasty in a fetus at 21 weeks' gestation with critical as and evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome. use of a pressure guidewire during fetal cardiac intervention offers several potential advantages over existing protocols. this technique augments fetal ultrasound as it relates to operator awareness of catheter and wire position (with continuous monitoring of pressure waveforms), improves on intraprocedural fetal hemodynamic monitoring and responsiveness to resuscitation, and provides a rich new data set of invasive fetal hemodynamics. this data set offers tremendous potential with regards to improving candidate selection and postintervention prognostication. in addition, we provide the first, to our knowledge, characterization of intracardiac pressures in a human fetus with congenital heart disease. given the realized and potential benefits associated with this technique, use of a pressure guidewire may become standard of care for all fetal cardiac interventions.

results of new research indicate that, contrary to previous thinking, youth do not have less effective thermoregulatory ability, insufficient cardiovascular capacity, or lower physical exertion tolerance compared with adults during exercise in the heat when adequate hydration is maintained. accordingly, besides poor hydration status, the primary determinants of reduced performance and exertional heat-illness risk in youth during sports and other physical activities in a hot environment include undue physical exertion, insufficient recovery between repeated exercise bouts or closely scheduled same-day training sessions or rounds of sports competition, and inappropriately wearing clothing, uniforms, and protective equipment that play a role in excessive heat retention. because these known contributing risk factors are modifiable, exertional heat illness is usually preventable. with appropriate preparation, modifications, and monitoring, most healthy children and adolescents can safely participate in outdoor sports and other physical activities through a wide range of challenging warm to hot climatic conditions.

to examine the associations between having a special health care need and school outcomes measured as attendance, student engagement, behavioral threats to achievement, and academic achievement. a total of 1457 children in the fourth through sixth grades from 34 schools in 3 school districts and their parents provided survey data; parents completed the children with special health care needs screener. school records were abstracted for attendance, grades, and standardized achievement test scores. across 34 schools, 33% of children screened positive for special health care needs. after adjusting for sociodemographic and school effects, children with special health care needs had lower motivation to do well in school, more disruptive behaviors, and more frequent experiences as a bully victim. they experienced significantly lower academic achievement, as measured by grades, standardized testing, and parental-assessed academic performance. these findings were observed for children who qualified as having a special health care need because they had functional limitations attributed to a chronic illness or a behavioral health problem but not for those who qualified only because they took prescription medications. specific subgroups of children with special health care needs are at increased risk for poor school outcomes. health and school professionals will need to collaborate to identify these children early, intervene with appropriate medical and educational services, and monitor long-term outcomes.

a loving parent faces peer pressure to reject routine vaccination of her children. she begins researching immunizations to make a well-informed health care decision in the best interests of her children. misleading and frightening information is readily accessible. she simply cannot find answers to her questions and concerns about vaccines. her poor choice made in ignorance and fear results in her 1-year-old daughter contracting spinal meningitis. once her daughter is in a pediatric intensive care isolation room suffering from this deadly disease, the mom gains access to accurate information regarding immunizations. all her questions regarding vaccine production, testing, safety, and ethics are answered. she wants accurate information readily available to all parents.

early intensive behavioral and developmental interventions for young children with autism spectrum disorders (asds) may enhance developmental outcomes. to systematically review evidence regarding such interventions for children aged 12 and younger with asds. we searched medline, psycinfo, and eric (education resources information center) from 2000 to may 2010. two reviewers independently assessed studies against predetermined inclusion/exclusion criteria. two reviewers independently extracted data regarding participant and intervention characteristics, assessment techniques, and outcomes and assigned overall quality and strength-of-evidence ratings using predetermined criteria. thirty-four unique studies met inclusion criteria. seventeen studies were case series; 2 were randomized controlled trials. we rated 1 study as good quality, 10 as fair quality, and 23 as poor quality. the strength of the evidence overall ranged from insufficient to low. studies of university of california los angeles/lovaas-based interventions and variants reported clinically significant gains in language and cognitive skills in some children, as did 1 randomized controlled trial of an early intensive developmental intervention approach (the early start denver model). specific parent-training approaches yielded gains in short-term language function and some challenging behaviors. data suggest that subgroups of children displayed more prominent gains across studies, but participant characteristics associated with greater gains are not well understood. studies of lovaas-based approaches and early intensive behavioral intervention variants and the early start denver model resulted in some improvements in cognitive performance, language skills, and adaptive behavior skills in some young children with asds, although the literature is limited by methodologic concerns.

although children with postnatal-onset microcephaly (pom) generally have poor development, we speculated that better somatic growth would predict better development in these children. we followed 57 children with pom for an average of 4.2 years (13 encephaloclastic, 14 dysgenetic, 6 with rett syndrome, 24 idiopathic) and calculated the developmental quotient (dq) at each visit (dq > 0.70 was considered normal). sd scores (sds) for measurements were analyzed using a repeated measures mixed-effects model to assess effect of weight, height, head circumference (hc), and age on dq. pearson's correlation was used to examine the independent influence of each variable on final dq. forty-four children (77%) had a low dq (mean: 0.33), but 13 (23%) had a normal dq (mean: 0.93), including 10 idiopathic and 3 encephaloclastic. mean hc fell below -2 sds in all before 1 year (destructive at 3.3 months, idiopathic low-dq at 7.5 months, dysgenetic at 8.5 months, rett syndrome at 11 months, and idiopathic normal-dq at 11.5 months). mean weights and heights both fell below -2 sds for all low-dq groups but remained normal in both normal-dq groups. weight, height, and hc were independent predictors of dq (p < .0001). final dq correlated with weight (r = 0.27), height (r = 0.41), and hc (r = 0.13). most children with pom have poor later development. whatever the cause of pom, persons in whom postnatal body growth (weight, height, hc) is better sustained have more favorable development, and in one-quarter of such persons (mostly idiopathic pom), final dq is normal.

hygiene and social distancing are recommended control measures for hand, foot, and mouth disease (hfmd) and herpangina. however, empirical data to support this recommendation are limited. during an outbreak of hfmd and herpangina due to infection by the human enterovirus 71, we defined a case as a vesicular papular rash on the hands, feet, buttocks, or oral mucosa and onset from april 30 to june 26, 2008. we selected 176 hfmd and herpangina case-children and a stratified random sample of 201 asymptomatic control-children; frequency matched according to residency status. we administered a questionnaire to the parents about their children's exposures and hygienic behaviors. risk factors for hfmd and herpangina included playing with neighborhood children (odds ratio [or]: 11 [95% confidence interval (ci): 6.2-17]), visiting an outpatient clinic for another reason ≤ 1 week before onset (or: 20 [95% ci: 5.0-88]), and community exposures to crowded places (or: 7.3 [95% ci: 4.1-13]). by using a score summarizing responses to 4 hand-washing questions, we found that 50% of the case-children and 2.5% of control-children had a poor score of 1 to 3, whereas 12% of the case-children and 78% of control-children had a good score of ≥ 7 (or: 0.00069 [95% ci: 0.0022-0.022]) after we adjusted for residency, age, and community exposures by using logistic regression. hand-washing by preschool-aged children and their caregivers had a significant protective effect against community-acquired hfmd and herpangina from the human enterovirus 71 infection.

children with medical complexity (cmc) have medical fragility and intensive care needs that are not easily met by existing health care models. cmc may have a congenital or acquired multisystem disease, a severe neurologic condition with marked functional impairment, and/or technology dependence for activities of daily living. although these children are at risk of poor health and family outcomes, there are few well-characterized clinical initiatives and research efforts devoted to improving their care. in this article, we present a definitional framework of cmc that consists of substantial family-identified service needs, characteristic chronic and severe conditions, functional limitations, and high health care use. we explore the diversity of existing care models and apply the principles of the chronic care model to address the clinical needs of cmc. finally, we suggest a research agenda that uses a uniform definition to accurately describe the population and to evaluate outcomes from the perspectives of the child, the family, and the broader health care system.

many preterm children display school difficulties, which may be mediated by impairment in executive function and memory. to evaluate executive and memory function among adolescents born preterm compared with term controls at 16 years. a total of 337 of 437 (77%) adolescents born in 1989 to 1992 with a birth weight < 1250 g and 102 term controls were assessed with a battery of executive function and memory tasks. multiple regression analyses were used to compare groups and to identify associations between selected factors and outcomes among preterm subjects. adolescents born preterm, compared with term controls, showed deficits in executive function in the order of 0.4 to 0.6 sd on tasks of verbal fluency, inhibition, cognitive flexibility, planning/organization, and working memory as well as verbal and visuospatial memory. after exclusion of adolescents with neurosensory disabilities and full-scale iq < 70, significant group differences persisted on most tests. preterm subjects, compared with term controls, were at increased risk of exhibiting problems related to executive dysfunction, as measured with the behavior rating inventory of executive function, on the metacognition index (odds ratio [or]: 2.5 [95% confidence interval (ci): 1.2-5.1]) and the global executive composite (or: 4.2 [95% ci: 1.6-10.9]), but not on the behavioral regulation index (or: 1.5 [95% ci: 0.7-3.5]). among adolescents born preterm, severe brain injury on neonatal ultrasound and lower maternal education were the most consistent factors associated with poor outcomes. even after exclusion of preterm subjects with significant disabilities, adolescents born preterm in the early 1990s were at increased risk of deficits in executive function and memory.

several studies have shown the adverse health consequences of food insecurity on household members. to what extent this relationship is mediated by gender among adolescents has not been documented. we hypothesized that the health consequences of food insecurity would be more pronounced in girls compared with boys. we used the first-round data from a 5-year longitudinal family survey of 2084 adolescents aged 13 to 17 years from urban, semiurban, and rural areas of southwest ethiopia. stratified random sampling was used to select households and adolescents. multivariable logistic regression was used to compare self-reported morbidity according to food-security status and gender after adjusting for nutritional and socioeconomic covariates. overall, 29.9% of girls and 19.2% of boys reported illness during the previous 1 month before the survey. food-insecure girls were twice as likely to report suffering from an illness (p < .01) compared with boys, and the risk of reported illness tripled when girls were food insecure and were part of food-insecure households (p < .01). girls were 7.4 and 7.0 times more likely to report difficulties with activities because of poor health and having a feeling of tiredness/low energy compared with boys, respectively (p < .001). we report that in a food-insecure situation, gender is an important predictor of an adolescent's self-reported health status. food-security interventions should consider gender as a key variable to narrow the gap in health between boys and girls.

most pediatricians have experienced uneasy interactions involving patients and/or their parents. the majority of literature on this topic reflects encounters in adult medicine, without providing much information for pediatricians who also face this challenge. unique to the pediatric approach is the added quotient of the parent/family dynamic. patients or their parents may have personality disorders or subclinical mental health issues, physicians may be overworked or have a lack of experience, and the health care system may be overburdened, fragmented, and inundated with poor communication. recognizing the physical or emotional responses triggered by challenging patients/families may allow the provider to effectively partner with, instead of confront, the patient or the family. in this article we review existing literature on this subject and describe possible strategies for the pediatrician to use during a difficult encounter.

child maltreatment is a public health problem with lifelong health consequences for survivors. each year, >29 000 adolescents leave foster care via emancipation without achieving family permanency. the previous 30 years of research has revealed the significant physical and mental health consequences of child maltreatment, yet health and well-being have not been a priority for the child welfare system. to describe the health outcomes of maltreated children and those in foster care and barriers to transitioning these adolescents to adult systems of care. we reviewed the literature about pediatric and adult health outcomes for maltreated children, barriers to transition, and recent efforts to improve health and well-being for this population. the health of child and adult survivors of child maltreatment is poor. both physical and mental health problems are significant, and many maltreated children have special health care needs. barriers to care include medical, child welfare, and social issues. although children often have complex medical problems, they infrequently have a medical home, their complex health care needs are poorly understood by the child welfare system that is responsible for them, and they lack the family supports that most young adults require for success. recent federal legislation requires states and local child welfare agencies to assess and improve health and well-being for foster children. few successful transition data are available for maltreated children and those in foster care, but opportunities for improvement have been highlighted by recent federal legislation.

the aim of our study was to investigate the moderating effect of school food programs in schools in disadvantaged neighborhoods on the association between household food insecurity and scholastic difficulties among adolescents. we analyzed data from the social and health survey of children and adolescents in quebec, canada, which was conducted in 1999 and included 2346 adolescent students 13 and 16 years of age (and 1983 of their parents). sample-weighted regression analyses were performed to determine the association between household food insecurity and school difficulties and to explore the moderating role of food supplementation programs with respect to this association. household food insecurity, which was linked to the indicators of family socioeconomic status, was strongly associated with the indicators of scholastic difficulties. this association disappeared for adolescents who benefited from food supplementation programs in schools in disadvantaged neighborhoods. the risk of school activity limitation decreased from or = 2.76 (95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.41-5.41) to or = 1.57 (95% ci: 1.35-3.40), the risk of below-average grades in the language of instruction decreased from or = 2.19 (95% ci: 1.28-3.74) to or = 0.59 (95% ci: 0.21-1.63), the risk of repeating a year decreased from or = 2.14 (95% ci: 1.35-3.40) to or = 0.87 (95% ci: 0.42-1.81), and the risk of self-rated poor academic performance decreased from or = 1.74 (95% ci: 1.08-2.81) to or = 0.81(95% ci: 0.37-1.78). school food supplementation is a moderating factor in the association between household food insecurity and scholastic difficulties for adolescents.

recombinant human growth hormone (gh) is approved for treatment of children with idiopathic short stature, and endocrinologists often depend on algorithms to predict adult height. because algorithm performance often is included in treatment decisions, we sought to evaluate agreement among height prediction formulas. we identified 3 commonly used algorithms for height prediction, the bayley-pinneau, roche-wainer-thissen, and khamis-roche methods. we constructed simulated samples of children with typical distributions of ages, heights, weights, bone ages, and parental heights seen in patients with idiopathic short stature, and we applied the algorithms to the simulated sample to determine whether predicted adult height was <160 cm for boys or <150 cm for girls (<1.2nd height percentiles for adults). we found substantial disagreement among algorithms in the proportions of simulated cases with predicted adult heights of <1.2nd percentile, a cutoff value that may influence gh treatment decisions. with the bayley-pinneau formula, 43% of boys and 81% of girls had predicted adult heights below this threshold; with the khamis-roche method, only 3% of boys and 0.2% of girls had predicted heights of <1.2nd percentile. roche-wainer-thissen predictions were between those values. overall agreement of the methods was poor (κ = 0.21) for boys and negative for girls. wide variation exists among formulas used to predict adult heights. because these algorithms may be used in decisions regarding whether to initiate gh treatment and assessment of the efficacy of gh in research trials, it is important for parents, pediatricians, and investigators to recognize the considerable variation involved in height predictions.

this study examined effects of iron deficiency anemia (ida) on specific domains of infant cognitive function and the role of ida-related socioemotional deficits in mediating and/or moderating these effects. infants were recruited during routine 9-month visits to an inner-city clinic. ida was defined as hemoglobin level <110 g/l with > or =2 abnormal iron deficiency indicators (mean corpuscular volume, red cell distribution width, zinc protoporphyrin, transferrin saturation, and ferritin). at 9 and 12 months, the fagan test of infant intelligence (ftii); a-not-b task; emotionality, activity, and sociability temperament survey; and behavior rating scale were administered. analyses were adjusted for potential confounders, including age and sociodemographic variables. twenty-eight infants met criteria for ida, 28 had nonanemic iron deficiency (na id) and 21 had iron sufficiency (is). there was a linear effect for object permanence at 9 months: infants with ida were least likely to exhibit object permanence, is most likely, and na id intermediate. infants with ida and those with hemoglobin level < or =105 g/l showed poorer recognition memory on the ftii than infants without ida. the behavior rating scale orientation/engagement measure partially mediated these effects. stronger effects of ida on these outcomes were seen in infants who scored more poorly on the socioemotional measures. these data indicate poorer object permanence and short-term memory encoding and/or retrieval in infants with ida at 9 months. these cognitive effects were attributable, in part, to ida-related deficits in socioemotional function. children with poor socioemotional performance seem to be more vulnerable to the effects of ida on cognitive function.

we tested the specific hypothesis that the presentation of auditory processing disorder (apd) is related to a sensory processing deficit. randomly chosen, 6- to 11-year-old children with normal hearing (n = 1469) were tested in schools in 4 regional centers across the united kingdom. caregivers completed questionnaires regarding their participating children's listening and communication skills. children completed a battery of audiometric, auditory processing (ap), speech-in-noise, cognitive (iq, memory, language, and literacy), and attention (auditory and visual) tests. ap measures separated the sensory and nonsensory contributions to spectral and temporal perception. ap improved with age. poor-for-age ap was significantly related to poor cognitive, communication, and speech-in-noise performance (p < .001). however, sensory elements of perception were only weakly related to those performance measures (r < 0.1), and correlations between auditory perception and cognitive scores were generally low (r = 0.1-0.3). multivariate regression analysis showed that response variability in the ap tests, reflecting attention, and cognitive scores were the best predictors of listening, communication, and speech-in-noise skills. presenting symptoms of apd were largely unrelated to auditory sensory processing. response variability and cognitive performance were the best predictors of poor communication and listening. we suggest that apd is primarily an attention problem and that clinical diagnosis and management, as well as further research, should be based on that premise.

to distinguish the effects of late preterm birth from the complications associated with the causes of delivery timing, this study used propensity score-matching methods on a statewide database that contains information on both mothers and infants. data for this study came from arkansas medicaid claims data linked to state birth certificate data for the years 2001 through 2005. we excluded all multiple births, infants with birth defects, and infants at <33 weeks of gestation. late preterm infants (lpis) (34 to 36 weeks of gestation) were matched with term infants (37-42 weeks of gestation) according to propensity scores, on the basis of infant, maternal, and clinical characteristics. a total of 5188 lpis were matched successfully with 15303 term infants. lpis had increased odds of poor outcomes during their birth hospitalization, including a need for mechanical ventilation (adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 1.31 [95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.01-1.68]), respiratory distress syndrome (aor: 2.84 [95% ci: 2.33-3.45]), and hypoglycemia (aor: 1.60 [95% ci: 1.26-2.03]). outpatient and inpatient medicaid expenditures in the first year were both modestly higher (outpatient, adjusted marginal effect: $108 [95% ci: $58-$158]; inpatient, $597 [95% ci: $528-$666]) for lpis. lpis are at increased risk of poor health-related outcomes during their birth hospitalization and of increased health care utilization during their first year.

amplitude-integrated electroencephalogram (aeeg) at <6 hours is the best single outcome predictor in term infants with perinatal asphyxia at normothermia. hypothermia has been used to treat those infants and proved to improve their outcome. the objectives of this study were to compare the predictive value of aeeg at <6 hours on outcomes in normothermia- and hypothermia-treated infants and to investigate the best outcome predictor (time to normal trace or sleep-wake cycling [swc]) in normothermia- and hypothermia-treated infants. seventy-four infants were recruited by using the coolcap entry criteria, and their outcomes were assessed by using the bayley scales of infant development ii at 18 months. the aeeg was recorded for 72 hours. patterns and voltages of aeeg backgrounds were assessed. the positive predictive value of an abnormal aeeg pattern at the age of 3 to 6 hours was 84% for normothermia and 59% for hypothermia. moderate abnormal voltage background at 3 to 6 hours of age did not predict outcome. the recovery time to normal background pattern was the best predictor of poor outcome (96.2% in hypothermia, 90.9% in normothermia). never developing swc always predicted poor outcome. time to swc was a better outcome predictor for infants who were treated with hypothermia (88.5%) than with normothermia (63.6%). early aeeg patterns can be used to predict outcome for infants treated with normothermia but not hypothermia. infants with good outcome had normalized background pattern by 24 hours when treated with normothermia and by 48 hours when treated with hypothermia.

informed decision-making requires that parents and research subjects understand the risks and benefits of a study, yet research suggests that comprehension of these elements is often poor. this study was designed to examine the effect of factors including manipulation of risk/benefit trade-offs, numeracy, and sociodemographics on parents' understanding of risks and benefits. a total of 4685 parents completed an internet survey in which they were randomly assigned to receive information about the risks and benefits of a hypothetical pain treatment study presented in 1 of 4 scenarios. parents' gist (essential) and verbatim (exact) understanding and their perceptions of the risks and benefits were compared across scenarios. the effects of parental sociodemographics and numeracy were also examined. participants who were randomly assigned to consider a research study that offered the possibility of improved outcomes had higher gist and verbatim understanding of the information than participants who were considering studies that offered only reductions in the risk for adverse effects. furthermore, these parents perceived the risks of the study to be significantly lower compared with the scenarios that offered the same risks but less benefit. white race, college education, and higher numeracy all were associated significantly with improved gist and verbatim understanding. research studies that offer only improved outcomes to participants may be evaluated more thoroughly than those that offer only reduced risks, and individual characteristics significantly moderate parents' ability to comprehend risk/benefit information. these results are important toward developing strategies to improve the ways in which risks and benefits are communicated to parents and research subjects.

the goal was to determine patient-, provider-, and clinic-level predictors of unrecognized elevated blood pressure (bp) in children. we hypothesized that being of healthy weight, having a bp of <120/80 mmhg, and being seen by a less experienced provider would result in decreased recognition. a cross-sectional study of clinic visits for children 3 to 20 years of age at an urban, pediatric primary care practice between january 1, 2006, and june 30, 2006, was performed. children with elevated systolic or diastolic bp (> or = 90th percentile or > or = 120/80 mmhg) were included. recognition was defined as having any of the following documented: repeat bp measurement, elevated-bp/hypertension diagnosis, plan to recheck bp, or initiation of hypertension evaluation. multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify characteristics associated with underrecognition. elevated bp occurred in 779 (39%) of 2000 visits. of 726 cases included in the analysis, 87% were not recognized by providers. patient-level predictors of underrecognition included systolic bp of <120 mmhg (odds ratio: 7.7 [95% confidence interval: 3.2-18.6]), diastolic bp of <80 mmhg (odds ratio: 2.4 [95% confidence interval: 1.1-5.0]), decreasing bmi z score, male gender, older age, lack of family history of cardiovascular disease, and negative medical history findings. being seen by a nurse practitioner and being seen by a less-experienced provider also were significant predictors. most bp elevations were not recognized by providers. poor recognition was most influenced by the absence of obviously elevated bp, obesity, and family history of cardiovascular disease.

many motivated new mothers fail to reach public health goals for breastfeeding, highlighting the need to identify risk factors. because having a family history of alcoholism is associated with blunted prolactin responses to an alcohol challenge in nonlactating individuals, this study aimed to identify associations in family history of alcoholism, prolactin, and breastfeeding behaviors in lactating women. this was a 2-day experimental study that used within-subject alcohol or control beverage consumption and between-subject family history of alcoholism factors. the participants were non-alcohol-dependent lactating women; 7 were family history-positive (fhp) for alcohol dependence, and 21 were family history-negative (fhn). consumption of 0.4 g/kg alcohol or nonalcoholic beverage occurred in separate randomized sessions, followed by use of a breast pump. basal and suckling-induced prolactin, blood alcohol concentrations, milk yield, self-reported drug effects, neophobia, and breastfeeding patterning were measured. although no group differences in alcohol pharmacokinetics were detected, fhp women exhibited blunted prolactin to breast stimulation after drinking the control and alcohol beverage and felt more of the stimulant-like effects of alcohol than did fhn women. fhp women reported more frequent daily breastfeeding than did fhn women. this is the first evidence that family history of alcoholism is associated with a blunted magnitude, rapidity, and duration of the prolactin response to breast stimulation and an alcohol challenge in lactating women. more frequent breastfeeding by fhp women suggests behavioral compensation for perceived and/or actual poor lactation. alcohol did not enhance lactational performance, further disputing the lore that alcohol is a galactagogue.

we sought to determine whether placental markers of intrauterine inflammation were associated with poor weight gain among premature infants in the neonatal period. we reviewed 697 preterm births prospectively enrolled as part of an ongoing molecular epidemiological study. placental markers and serial weight gain were analyzed for premature infants who were hospitalized for >/=21 days (n = 256). placentas were examined for maternal inflammatory response (mir), defined as subchorionitis, chorioamnionitis, deciduitis, or free membranitis, and fetal inflammatory response (fir), defined as inflammation extending to the umbilical cord or chorionic plate. multivariate linear regression and stratified analyses were performed. decreases in weight gain at day 21 were associated with the presence of either mir or fir (beta coefficient = -4.63 +/- 1.41; p = .001). the association was stronger with fir than mir (p for trend = .0027) and persisted in the remaining hospitalized infants at day 28 (n = 223; beta coefficient = -5.53 +/- 1.85; p = .0028). mean body weights were similar among the 3 groups by corrected age of 36 weeks or discharge, whichever came first. associations between placental inflammation and poor growth persisted among infants with prenatal corticosteroid exposure and/or neonatal complications and remained marginally significant in the nonexposed groups. among infants without intrauterine growth restriction, significant association persisted (n = 186; beta coefficient = -5.68 +/- 1.56; p = .0003). placental inflammation is associated with poor neonatal growth. mir and fir may be useful markers for identifying infants at risk for postnatal growth failure.

the comparatively poor music appreciation in patients with cochlear implants might be ascribed to an inadequate exposure to music; however, the effect of training on music perception in prelingually deafened children with cochlear implants remains unknown. this study aimed to investigate whether previous musical education improves pitch perception ability in these children. twenty-seven children with congenital/prelingual deafness of profound degree were studied. test stimuli consisted of 2 sequential piano tones, ranging from c (256 hz) to b (495 hz). children were asked to identify the pitch relationship between the 2 tones (same, higher, or lower). effects of musical training duration, pitch-interval size, current age, age of implantation, gender, and type of cochlear implant on accuracy of pitch perception were evaluated. the duration of musical training positively correlated with the correct rate of pitch perception. pitch perception performance was better in children who had a cochlear implant and were older than 6 years than in those who were aged < or =6 years (ie, preschool). effect of pitch-interval size was insignificant on pitch perception, and there was no correlation between pitch perception and the age of implantation, gender, or type of cochlear implant. musical training seems to improve pitch perception ability in prelingually deafened children with a cochlear implant. auditory plasticity might play an important role in such enhancement. this suggests that incorporation of a structured training program on music perception early in life and as part of the postoperative rehabilitation program for prelingually deafened children with cochlear implants would be beneficial. a longitudinal study is needed to show whether improvement of music performance in these children is measurable by use of auditory evoked potentials.

some neonatologists state that at the delivery of extremely premature infants they rely on "how the baby looks" when deciding whether to initiate resuscitation. previous studies have reported poor correlation between early clinical signs and prognosis. to determine if neonatologists can accurately predict survival to discharge of extremely premature infants on the basis of observations in the first minutes after birth. we showed videos of the resuscitation of 10 extremely premature infants (<26 weeks' gestation) to attending neonatologists and fellows from the 3 major perinatal centers in melbourne, australia. antenatal information was available to the observers. a monitor visible in each video displayed the heart rate and oxygen saturation of the infant. observers were asked to estimate the likelihood of survival to discharge for each infant at 3 time points: 20 seconds, 2 minutes, and 5 minutes after birth. the predictive ability of observers was expressed as the area (95% confidence interval [ci]) under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve. seventeen attending neonatologists and 17 neonatal fellows completed the study. receiver-operating-characteristic curves were generated for the combined and individual groups. observers' ability to predict survival was poor (combined results): 0.61 (95% ci: 0.54-0.67) at 20 seconds, 0.59 (95% ci: 0.52-0.64) at 2 minutes, and 0.61 (95% ci: 0.55-0.67) at 5 minutes. level of experience did not affect the observers' accuracy of predicting survival. neonatologists' reliance on initial appearance and early response to resuscitation in predicting survival for extremely premature infants is misplaced.

to evaluate the performance of a rapid influenza diagnostic test (ridt) in detecting h1n1 2009 influenza a virus in respiratory samples from pediatric patients in comparison to that of real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) and viral culture. methodology. this was a cross-sectional diagnostic-accuracy study conducted at a tertiary care children's hospital. patients for whom the ridt (binaxnow [binax, inc, portland, me]), viral culture, and rrt-pcr results were known were included. sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios (lrs) were calculated. a total of 3030 specimens had ridt results paired with both rrt-pcr and viral culture results. with rrt-pcr as the reference, overall test sensitivity was 45% (95% confidence interval [ci]: 43.3%-46.3%) and specificity was 98.6% (95% ci: 98.1%-99%). positive and negative lrs were 32.9 (95% ci: 22.9-45.4) and 0.56 (95% ci: 0.54-0.58), respectively. ridt sensitivity was significantly higher in young infants and children younger than 2 years than in older children. using viral culture as the reference standard, ridt sensitivity was 55.5% (95% ci: 51.9%-95.6%) and specificity was 95.6% (95% ci: 95%-96.1%). the positive and negative lrs were 12.6 and 0.47, respectively. the ridt had relatively poor sensitivity but excellent specificity in this consecutive series of respiratory specimens obtained from pediatric patients. although a positive ridt result was highly accurate in predicting infection with influenza type a h1n1 2009 in children, a negative ridt result did not preclude a child having h1n1. therefore, for children at high risk with influenza-like illnesses during high-prevalence periods of influenza, empiric initiation of antiviral therapy should be considered for patients with a negative ridt result.

poor communication and teamwork may contribute to errors during neonatal resuscitation. our objective was to evaluate whether interns who received a 2-hour teamwork training intervention with the neonatal resuscitation program (nrp) demonstrated more teamwork and higher quality resuscitations than control subjects. participants were noncertified 2007 and 2008 incoming interns for pediatrics, combined pediatrics and internal medicine, family medicine, emergency medicine, and obstetrics and gynecology (n = 98). pediatrics and combined pediatrics/internal medicine interns were eligible for 6-month follow-up (n = 34). a randomized trial was conducted in which half of the participants in the team training arm practiced nrp skills by using high-fidelity simulators; the remaining practiced with low-fidelity simulators, as did control subjects. blinded, trained observers viewed video recordings of high-fidelity-simulated resuscitations for teamwork and resuscitation quality. high-fidelity training (hft) group had higher teamwork frequency than did control subjects (12.8 vs 9.0 behaviors per minute; p < .001). intervention groups maintained more workload management (control subjects: 89.3%; low-fidelity training [lft] group: 98.0% [p < .001]; hft group: 98.8%; hft group versus control subjects [p < .001]) and completed resuscitations faster (control subjects: 10.6 minutes; lft group: 8.6 minutes [p = .040]; hft group: 7.4 minutes; hft group versus control subjects [p < .001]). overall, intervention teams completed the resuscitation an average of 2.6 minutes faster than did control subjects, a time reduction of 24% (95% confidence interval: 12%-37%). intervention groups demonstrated more frequent teamwork during 6-month follow-up resuscitations (11.8 vs 10.0 behaviors per minute; p = .030). trained participants exhibited more frequent teamwork behaviors (especially the hft group) and better workload management and completed the resuscitation more quickly than did control subjects. the impact on team behaviors persisted for at least 6 months. incorporating team training into the nrp curriculum is a feasible and effective way to teach interns teamwork skills. it also improves simulated resuscitation quality by shortening the duration.

the objective of this study was to describe food and beverage brand placements in a large representative sample of popular movies. we identified and coded brand placements for foods, beverages, and food retail establishments in the top 20 us box office movie hits for each year from 1996 to 2005. we also coded general movie characteristics (motion picture association of america rating, run time, genre, and information about major characters). we summarized the number and types of food, beverage, and food retail establishment brands by movie characteristics and also identified manufacturers that are associated with each of the brands. of the 200 movies coded, 138 (69%) contained at least 1 food, beverage, or food retail establishment brand. movies rated pg-13 and r were significantly more likely to have brand placements compared with movies in other rating categories. comedies, action/adventures, and horror films had more brand placements than other genres. we did not detect a significant difference in the number of movies with brand placements or mean number of placements per movie by year of movie release. a total of 1180 brand placements were identified and verified, including 427 food, 425 beverage, and 328 food retail establishment brand placements. candy/confections (26%) and salty snacks (21%) were the most prevalent food brands, sugar-sweetened beverages (76%) were the most prevalent beverage brands, and fast food composed two thirds of the food retail establishment brand placements. food, beverage, and food retail establishment brands are frequently portrayed in movies, and most of the brand placements are for energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods or product lines. movies are a potent source of advertising to children, which has been largely overlooked.

our aim was to assess the longitudinal trajectory of childhood receptive language skills and early influences on the course of language development. drawing on data collected for a nationally representative british birth cohort, the 1970 british cohort study, we examined the relationship between directly assessed early receptive language ability, family background, housing conditions, early literacy environment, and adult literacy skills. a sample of 11349 cohort members who completed the english picture vocabulary test at 5 years of age were studied again at 34 years of age, when they completed a direct assessment of their basic literacy skills. we contrasted experiences of individuals with language problems at age 5 against the experiences of those with normal language skills at that age, assessing the role of socioeconomic family background and early literacy environment in influencing the longitudinal course of developmental language problems. statistical comparisons of rates with chi(2) tests at p values of .001, .01, and .05 were made, as well as multivariate logistic regressions. cohort members with receptive language problems at age 5 had a relatively disadvantaged home life in childhood, both in terms of socioeconomic resources and the education level of their parents, but also regarding their exposure to a stimulating early literacy environment. although there is significant risk for poor adult literacy among children with early language problems, the majority of these children develop competent functional literacy levels by the age of 34. factors that reduce the risk for persistent language problems include the child being born into a working family, parental education beyond minimum school-leaving age, advantageous housing conditions, and preschool attendance. effective literacy-promoting interventions provided by pediatric primary care providers should target both children and parents.

we evaluated proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (mrsi) findings for children with traumatic brain injury attributable to nonaccidental trauma (nat) early after injury, to determine whether brain metabolite changes predicted outcomes. proton mrsi (1.5 t) was performed (mean: 5 days after injury [range: 1-30 days]) through the level of the corpus callosum for 90 children with confirmed nat. regional n-acetylaspartate/total creatine, n-acetylaspartate/total choline, and choline/creatine ratios and the presence of lactate were measured. data on long-term outcomes defined at > or =6 months were collected for 44 of 90 infants. we grouped patients into good (normal, mild disability, or moderate disability; n = 32) and poor (severe disability, vegetative state, or dead; n = 12) outcome groups. we found that n-acetylaspartate/creatine and n-acetylaspartate/choline ratios (mean total, corpus callosum, and frontal white matter) were significantly decreased in patients with poor outcomes (p < .001). a logistic regression model using age, initial glasgow coma scale score, presence of retinal hemorrhage, lactate on mrsi scans, and mean total n-acetylaspartate/creatine ratio predicted outcomes accurately in 100% of cases. reduced n-acetylaspartate levels (ie, neuronal loss/dysfunction) and elevated lactate levels (altered energy metabolism) correlated with poor neurologic outcomes for infants with nat. elevated lactate levels may reflect primary or secondary hypoxic-ischemic injury, which may occur with nat. our data suggest that mrsi performed early after injury can be used for long-term prognosis.

the purpose of this study was to examine pediatrician implementation of bmi and provider interventions for childhood overweight prevention and treatment. data were obtained from the american academy of pediatrics (aap) periodic survey of fellows no. 65, a nationally representative survey of aap members. surveys that addressed the provision of screening and management of childhood overweight and obesity in primary care settings were mailed to 1622 nonretired us aap members in 2006. one thousand five (62%) surveys were returned; 677 primary care clinicians in active practice were eligible for the survey. nearly all respondents (99%) reported measuring height and weight at well visits, and 97% visually assess children for overweight at most or every well-child visit. half of the respondents (52%) assess bmi percentile for children older than 2 years. most pediatricians reported that they do not have time to counsel on overweight and obesity, that counseling has poor results, and that having simple diet and exercise recommendations would be helpful in their practice. pediatricians in large practices and those who had attended continuing medical education on obesity were more familiar with national expert guidelines, were more likely to use bmi percentile, and had higher self-efficacy in practices related to childhood and adolescent overweight and obesity. multivariate analysis revealed that pediatricians with better access to community and adjunct resources were more likely to use bmi percentile. bmi-percentile screening in primary pediatric practice is underused. most pediatricians believe that they can and should try to prevent overweight and obesity, yet few believe there are good treatments once a child is obese. training, time, and resource limitations affect bmi-percentile use. awareness of national guidelines may improve rates of bmi-percentile use and recognition of opportunities to prevent childhood and adolescent obesity.

accurate prediction of neurodevelopmental outcome in neonatal encephalopathy (ne) is important for clinical management and to evaluate neuroprotective therapies. we undertook a meta-analysis of the prognostic accuracy of cerebral magnetic resonance (mr) biomarkers in infants with neonatal encephalopathy. we reviewed all studies that compared an mr biomarker performed during the neonatal period with neurodevelopmental outcome at > or =1 year. we followed standard methods recommended by the cochrane diagnostic accuracy method group and used a random-effects model for meta-analysis. summary receiver operating characteristic curves and forest plots of each mr biomarker were calculated. chi(2) tests examined heterogeneity. thirty-two studies (860 infants with ne) were included in the meta-analysis. for predicting adverse outcome, conventional mri during the neonatal period (days 1-30) had a pooled sensitivity of 91% (95% confidence interval [ci]: 87%-94%) and specificity of 51% (95% ci: 45%-58%). late mri (days 8-30) had higher sensitivity but lower specificity than early mri (days 1-7). proton mr spectroscopy deep gray matter lactate/n-acetyl aspartate (lac/naa) peak-area ratio (days 1-30) had 82% overall pooled sensitivity (95% ci: 74%-89%) and 95% specificity (95% ci: 88%-99%). on common study analysis, lac/naa had better diagnostic accuracy than conventional mri performed at any time during neonatal period. the discriminatory powers of the posterior limb of internal capsule sign and brain-water apparent diffusion coefficient were poor. deep gray matter lac/naa is the most accurate quantitative mr biomarker within the neonatal period for prediction of neurodevelopmental outcome after ne. lac/naa may be useful in early clinical management decisions and counseling parents and as a surrogate end point in clinical trials that evaluate novel neuroprotective therapies.

we examined the association of household language use and access to care among children with special health care needs (cshcn). from this study we describe the demographics of children and the prevalence of selected access characteristics according to their primary household language and examine the independent effects of household language on health care access, unmet needs, and family impact while controlling for confounding variables. data from the 2005-2006 national survey of children with special health care needs, a nationally representative telephone survey of 40,723 cshcn, were analyzed. bivariate and multivariable analyses were used to examine disparities and estimate adjusted odds ratios of health care access, satisfaction, and family-impact measures for cshcn from non-english-primary-language (nepl) versus english-primary-language (epl) households. nearly 14% of all us children live in nepl households. nepl cshcn were significantly more likely to be hispanic or other race, be poor, have less educated parents, and reside in metropolitan areas and larger households and yet were less likely to be on cash assistance from welfare. logistic regression showed that nepl cshcn were twice as likely to lack access to a medical home, a usual source of care, and family-centered care. they were 4 times as likely to lack health insurance, and their family members were also more likely to lack adequate insurance. family members of nepl children were almost twice as likely to have to stop employment as a result of their child's condition. although limited by program eligibility contingent on immigrant status and state policies, increased referrals to programs such as the state children's health insurance program and medicaid can improve access while utilization can be improved by the availability of interpreters, community health workers, linguistically concordant providers, and outreach education efforts of nepl parents.

this purpose of this study was to describe differences in early intervention (ei) participation according to state among a cohort of young children with parent-reported developmental delays and disabilities. data were obtained from the 2005-2006 national survey of children with special health care needs to describe state differences in ei participation. multilevel modeling was used to estimate the relative contributions of child sociodemographic and developmental characteristics, and state ei eligibility policy on ei participation. the overall rate of ei participation was 45.7% (23.1%-83.3% across the states). ei participants were less likely to be hispanic, live in a multiracial family, be poor, have a developmental delay, or have a less severe condition/delay. the predicted probability of receiving ei was lower for children who lived in states with more strict ei eligibility criteria than those with liberal criteria (.43 vs .52). poverty influenced this association, with the adjusted probabilities of receiving ei for poor (<100% federal poverty level) and nonpoor (>185% federal poverty level) children being .18 and .36, respectively (p < .05). among nonpoor children, those who lived in states with strict eligibility criteria were nearly as likely as poor children who lived in states with liberal eligibility criteria to receive ei (.33 vs .36; p < .05). the results of this study reveal marked disparities and unmet needs in ei participation as a function of both characteristics of the child and the state program. improving developmental services for vulnerable populations requires addressing these sources of disparity.

as extremely preterm infant mortality rates have decreased, concerns regarding resource use have intensified. accurate models for predicting time to hospital discharge could aid in resource planning, family counseling, and stimulate quality-improvement initiatives. to develop, validate, and compare several models for predicting the time to hospital discharge for infants <27 weeks' estimated gestational age, on the basis of time-dependent covariates as well as the presence of 5 key risk factors as predictors. we conducted a retrospective analysis of infants <27 weeks' estimated gestational age who were born between july 2002 and december 2005 and survived to discharge from a eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network site. time to discharge was modeled as continuous (postmenstrual age at discharge) and categorical (early and late discharge) variables. three linear and logistic regression models with time-dependent covariate inclusion were developed (perinatal factors only, perinatal + early-neonatal factors, and perinatal + early-neonatal + later factors). models for early and late discharge that used the cumulative presence of 5 key risk factors as predictors were also evaluated. predictive capabilities were compared by using the coefficient of determination (r(2)) for the linear models and the area under the curve (auc) of the receiver operating characteristic curve for the logistic models. data from 2254 infants were included. prediction of postmenstrual age at discharge was poor. however, models that incorporated later clinical characteristics were more accurate in predicting early or late discharge (auc: 0.76-0.83 [full models] vs 0.56-0.69 [perinatal factor models]). in simplified key-risk-factors models, the predicted probabilities for early and late discharge compared favorably with the observed rates. furthermore, the auc (0.75-0.77) was similar to those of the models that included the full factor set. prediction of early or late discharge is poor if only perinatal factors are considered, but it improves substantially with knowledge of later-occurring morbidities. predictive models that use a few key risk factors are comparable to the full models and may offer a clinically applicable strategy.

periventricular hemorrhagic infarction (pvhi) is a major contributing factor to poor neurodevelopmental outcomes in preterm infants. we hypothesized that surviving infants with unilateral pvhi would have more favorable outcomes than those with bilateral pvhi. this was a multicenter, retrospective study of infants who were admitted to 3 nicus in north carolina from 1998 to 2004. the clinical course and late neuroimaging studies and neurodevelopmental outcomes of 69 infants who weighed <1500 g and had confirmed pvhi on early cranial ultrasonography were reviewed. a predictive model for bayley scales of infant development, second edition, mental developmental index (mdi) <70 was constructed by using radiologic and clinical variables. infants with unilateral pvhi had higher median mdi (82 vs 49) and psychomotor developmental index (53 vs 49) than infants with bilateral pvhi. infants with unilateral pvhi were less likely to have severe cerebral palsy (adjusted odds ratio: 0.15 [95% confidence interval (ci): 0.05-0.45]) than infants with bilateral pvhi. infants who had unilateral pvhi and developed periventricular leukomalacia and retinopathy of prematurity that required surgery had an increased probability of having mdi <70 compared with those without these complications (probability of mdi <70: 89% [95% ci: 0.64-1.00] vs 11% [95% ci: 0.01-0.28]). infants with unilateral pvhi had better motor and cognitive outcomes than infants with bilateral pvhi. by combining laterality of pvhi, periventricular leukomalacia, and retinopathy of prematurity it is possible to estimate the probability of having an mdi <70, which will assist clinicians when counseling families.

the objective of this study was to assess whether pediatric inpatients who receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) for bradycardia with poor perfusion are more likely to survive to hospital discharge than pediatric inpatients who receive cpr for pulseless arrest (asystole/pulseless electrical activity [pea]), after controlling for confounding characteristics. a prospective cohort from the national registry of cardiopulmonary resuscitation was enrolled between january 4, 2000, and february 23, 2008. patients who were younger than 18 years and had an in-hospital event that required chest compressions for >2 minutes were eligible. patients were divided into 2 groups on the basis of initial rhythm and pulse state: bradycardia/poor perfusion and asystole/pea. patient characteristics, event characteristics, and clinical characteristics were analyzed as possible confounders. univariate analysis between bradycardia and asystole/pea patient groups was performed. multivariable logistic regression was used to determine whether an initial state of bradycardia/poor perfusion was independently associated with survival to discharge. a total of 6288 patients who were younger than 18 years were reported; 3342 met all inclusion criteria. a total of 1853 (55%) patients received chest compressions for bradycardia/poor perfusion compared with 1489 (45%) for asystole/pea. overall, 755 (40.7%) of 1353 patients with bradycardia survived to hospital discharge, compared with 365 (24.5%) of 1489 patients with asystole/pea. after controlling for known confounders, cpr for bradycardia with poor perfusion was associated with increased survival to hospital discharge. pediatric inpatients with chest compressions initiated for bradycardia and poor perfusion before onset of pulselessness were more likely to survive to discharge than pediatric inpatients with chest compressions initiated for asystole or pea.

the nation's leading sources of morbidity and health disparities (eg, preterm birth, obesity, chronic lung disease, cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, mental health disorders, and cancer) require an evidence-based approach to the delivery of effective preventive care across the life course (eg, prenatal care, primary preventive care, immunizations, physical activity, nutrition, smoking cessation, and early diagnostic screening). health literacy may be a critical and modifiable factor for improving preventive care and reducing health disparities. recent studies among adults have established an independent association between lower health literacy and poorer understanding of preventive care information and poor access to preventive care services. children of parents with higher literacy skills are more likely to have better outcomes in child health promotion and disease prevention. adult studies in disease prevention have suggested that addressing health literacy would be an efficacious strategy for reducing health disparities. future initiatives to reduce child health inequities should include health-promotion strategies that meet the health literacy needs of children, adolescents, and their caregivers.

a full accounting of the excess burden of poor health in childhood must include any continuing loss of productivity over the life course. including these costs results in a much higher estimate of the burden than focusing only on medical costs and other shorter-run costs to parents (such as lost work time). policies designed to reduce this burden must go beyond increasing eligibility for health insurance, because disparities exist not only in access to health insurance but also in take-up of insurance, access to care, and the incidence of health conditions. we need to create a comprehensive safety net for young children that includes automatic eligibility for basic health coverage under medicaid unless parents opt out by enrolling children in a private program; health and nutrition services for pregnant women and infants; quality preschool; and home visiting for infants and children at risk. such a program is feasible and would be relatively inexpensive.

national attention to racial and ethnic health disparities has increased over the last decades, but marked improvements in minority health, especially among children, have been slow to emerge. a life-course perspective with sustained community engagement takes into account root causes of poor health in minority and low-income communities. this perspective involves a variety of primary care, public health, and academic stakeholders. a life-course perspective holds great promise for having a positive impact on health inequities. in this article we provide background information on available tools and resources for engaging with communities. we also offer examples of community-primary care provider interventions that have had a positive impact on racial and ethnic health disparities. common elements of these projects are described; additional local and national resources are listed; and future research needs, specifically in communities around issues that are relevant to children, are articulated. examples throughout the history of pediatrics show the potential to eliminate racial and ethnic health disparities not only for children but also for all populations across the life course.

a child's sense of control over life and health outcomes as well as perceptions of the world as fair, equal, and just are significantly influenced by his or her social experiences and environment. unfortunately, the social environment for many children of color includes personal and family experiences of racial discrimination that foster perceptions of powerlessness, inequality, and injustice. in turn, these perceptions may influence child health outcomes and disparities by affecting biological functioning (eg, cardiovascular and immune function) and the quality of the parent-child relationship and promoting psychological distress (eg, self-efficacy, depression, anger) that can be associated with risk-taking and unhealthy behaviors. in this article we review existing theoretical models and empirical studies of the impact of racial discrimination on the health and development of children of color in the united states. on the basis of this literature, a conceptual model of exposure to racial discrimination as a chronic stressor and a risk factor for poor health outcomes and child health disparities is presented.

to determine if serum levels of s100b are higher in children with cht and ici as detected by cranial ct and if long bone fractures affect the level of s100b in children with cht and skeletal injury. children <18 years of age who presented to an urban pediatric emergency department or were transferred from a referral hospital within 6 hours after accidental closed head trauma and who underwent cranial computed tomography were enrolled prospectively. mean serum s100b levels for children with or without intracranial injury (ici) and long-bone fractures were evaluated through analysis of covariance. one hundred fifty-two children, 24 with ici and 128 without ici, were enrolled prospectively. twenty-five children had long-bone fractures. children with ici were significantly younger than those without ici (6.9 vs 9.8 years; p = .01). the time of venipuncture after injury was significantly later in children with ici (p = .03). mean s100b levels were significantly greater for children with ici (212.9 vs 84.4 ng/l; p = .001), children with long-bone fractures (p = .008), and nonwhite children (p = .03). after controlling for time of venipuncture, long-bone fractures, and race, mean s100b levels were still greater for children with ici (409 vs 118 ng/l; p = .001). the ability of serum s100b measurements to detect ici, determined as the area under the curve, was 0.67. after controlling for time of venipuncture, long-bone fractures, and race, s100b levels were still higher in children with ici than in those without ici. however, the ability of serum s100b measurements to detect ici was poor.

this study investigated neonatal s100b levels as a biomarker of prenatal selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (ssri) exposure. maternal (delivery; n = 53) and neonatal (cord; n = 52) serum s100b levels were compared between prenatally ssri-exposed (maternal, n = 36; neonatal, n = 37; duration: 230 +/- 71 days) and nonexposed (maternal, n = 17; neonatal, n = 15) groups. measures of maternal depression and anxiety symptoms were assessed during the third trimester (33-36 weeks), and neonatal outcomes, including apgar scores, birth weight, gestational age at birth, and symptoms of poor neonatal adaptation, were recorded. s100b levels were significantly lower in prenatally ssri-exposed neonates than in nonexposed neonates, controlling for gestational age and third-trimester maternal mood (p = .036). in contrast, ssri-exposed mothers had significantly higher maternal serum s100b levels, compared with nonexposed mothers (p = .014), even controlling for maternal mood in the third trimester. s100b levels were not associated with maternal or neonatal drug levels, duration of prenatal exposure, demographic variables, or risk for poor neonatal adaptation. prenatal ssri exposure was associated with decreased neonatal serum s100b levels, controlling for prenatal maternal mood. neonatal s100b levels did not reflect neonatal behavioral outcomes and were not related to pharmacologic indices. these findings are consistent with prenatal alcohol and cocaine exposures, which also alter central serotonin levels.

evidence shows that hospital-based practices affect breastfeeding duration and exclusivity throughout the first year of life. however, a 2007 cdc survey of us maternity facilities documented poor adherence with evidence-based practice. of a possible score of 100 points, the average hospital scored only 63 with great regional disparities. inappropriate provision and promotion of infant formula were common, despite evidence that such practices reduce breastfeeding success. twenty-four percent of facilities reported regularly giving non-breast milk supplements to more than half of all healthy, full-term infants. metrics available for measuring quality of breastfeeding care, range from comprehensive baby-friendly hospital certification to compliance with individual steps such as the rate of in-hospital exclusive breastfeeding. other approaches to improving quality of breastfeeding care include (1) education of hospital decision-makers (eg, through publications, seminars, professional organization statements, benchmark reports to hospitals, and national grassroots campaigns), (2) recognition of excellence, such as through baby-friendly hospital designation, (3) oversight by accrediting organizations such as the joint commission or state hospital authorities, (4) public reporting of indicators of the quality of breastfeeding care, (5) pay-for-performance incentives, in which medicaid or other third-party payers provide additional financial compensation to individual hospitals that meet certain quality standards, and (6) regional collaboratives, in which staff from different hospitals work together to learn from each other and meet quality improvement goals at their home institutions. such efforts, as well as strong central leadership, could affect both initiation and duration of breastfeeding, with substantial, lasting benefits for maternal and child health.

we sought to determine outcomes of kawasaki disease (kd) and to explore factors associated with poor clinical outcomes for patients diagnosed outside the age range of 1 to 4 years. a retrospective review of data for all patients seen between january 1990 and april 2007 was performed. patients were stratified into 5 groups on the basis of age at diagnosis. a total of 1374 patients were identified; 61 (4%) were <6 months of age at diagnosis, 114 (8%) 6 months to <1 year, 854 (62%) 1 to 4 years, 258 (19%) 5 to 9 years, and 87 (6%) >9 years. patients <1 year of age and those >9 years of age were more likely to have coronary artery abnormalities than were patients diagnosed between 1 and 4 years of age. patients diagnosed between the ages of 5 and 9 years were at the lowest risk. patients at both extremes of the age spectrum were more likely to present with <4 of the classic kd features, but only those <6 months or >5 years of age were at increased risk of being diagnosed >12 days after illness onset. patients <6 months of age had lower albumin levels, and those <1 year of age had higher white blood cell and platelet counts, all of which are known predictors of coronary artery abnormalities. patients >9 years of age were less likely to receive intravenous immunoglobulin treatment. outcomes for children diagnosed with kd at either extreme of the age spectrum are suboptimal, although the associated factors are different.

sequelae of academic underachievement, behavioral problems, and poor executive function (ef) have been extensively reported for very preterm ( 0.51). very preterm and/or vlbw children have moderate-to-severe deficits in academic achievement, attention problems, and internalizing behavioral problems and poor ef, which are adverse outcomes that were strongly correlated to their immaturity at birth. during transition to young adulthood these children continue to lag behind term-born peers.

attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) is one of the most common neurobehavioral conditions of childhood and adolescence. despite availability of effective treatment options, initiation of treatment is variable and persistence with therapeutic regimens is poor. we sought to better understand how parents make decisions about treatment for their child or adolescent with adhd. we conducted a qualitative study among parents of children and adolescents; 52 parents participated in 1 of 12 focus groups. parents answered questions about decision-making, information sharing, and sources of conflict and uncertainty. sessions were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. themes were coded independently by 4 of the investigators, who then agreed on common themes. parents in our study made decisions about treatment for their child with adhd in the midst of experiencing a variety of emotions as they witnessed child functional impairments at home and at school. in addition, parents felt stress as a result of their daily efforts to manage their child's struggles. multiple factors influenced the decision to initiate medication. subsequently, revisiting the decision to give their child medicine for adhd was common. many parents contrasted time on and off medicine to help inform management decisions. trials stopping medication were almost always parent- or child-initiated. decisions about medication use for children and adolescents with adhd are made and frequently revisited by their parents. choices are often made under stressful conditions and influenced by a variety of factors. striking a balance between benefits and concerns is an ongoing process that is often informed by contrasting time on and off medication. development of strategies to support families across the continuum of decisions faced while managing adhd is warranted.

to explore the relationship between sleep-disordered breathing (sdb) and behavioral problems among inner-city children with asthma. we examined data for 194 children (aged 4-10 years) who were enrolled in a school-based asthma intervention program (response rate: 72%). sdb was assessed by using the sleep-related breathing disorder questionnaire that contains 3 subscales: snoring, sleepiness, and attention/hyperactivity. for the current study, we modified the sleep-related breathing disorder questionnaire by removing the 6 attention/hyperactivity items. a sleep score of >0.33 was considered indicative of sdb. to assess behavior, caregivers completed the behavior problem index (bpi), which includes 8 behavioral subdomains. we conducted bivariate analyses and multiple linear regression to determine the association of sdb with bpi scores. the majority of children (mean age: 8.2 years) were male (56%), black (66%), and insured by medicaid (73%). overall, 33% of the children experienced sdb. in bivariate analyses, children with sdb had significantly higher (worse) behavior scores compared with children without sdb on total bpi (13.7 vs 8.8) and the subdomains externalizing (9.4 vs 6.3), internalizing (4.4 vs 2.5), anxious/depressed (2.4 vs 1.3), headstrong (3.2 vs 2.1), antisocial (2.3 vs 1.7), hyperactive (3.0 vs 1.8), peer conflict (0.74 vs 0.43), and immature (2.0 vs 1.5). in multiple regression models adjusting for several important covariates, sdb remained significantly associated with total bpi scores and externalizing, internalizing, anxious/depressed, headstrong, and hyperactive behaviors. results were consistent across sdb subscales (snoring, sleepiness). we found that poor sleep was independently associated with behavior problems in a large proportion of urban children with asthma. systematic screening for sdb in this high-risk population might help to identify children who would benefit from additional intervention.

to assess children and adolescents with severe fatigue who are referred to pediatricians and to examine whether factors can be identified at their first visit that predict worse outcomes at 1 year. ninety-one patients, aged 8 to 18 years completed questionnaires about sleep, somatic symptoms, physical activity, and fatigue. they were reassessed 12 months later. measurements at baseline and outcome were analyzed by using univariable logistic regression with persistent, severe fatigue (yes/no) and persistent school absence (yes/no) as dependent variables and baseline scores as independent variables. after 12 months, 50.6% of the children and adolescents showed improvement; 29.1% had persistent fatigue, and 20.3% had persistent fatigue with significant school absence. factors associated with the poorest outcome were sleep problems (odds ratio [or]: 1.4 [95% confidence interval (ci): 1.1-1.8]), initial fatigue score (or: 1.1 [95% ci: 1.0-1.2]), somatic complaints such as hot and cold spells (or: 1.9 [95% ci: 1.2-3.0]), blurred vision (or: 2.1 [95% ci: 1.1-4.0]), pain in arms and legs (or: 2.0 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]), back pain (or: 1.8 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]), constipation (or: 1.7 [95% ci: 1.0-2.7]), and memory deficits (or: 1.8 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]). resolved fatigue was associated with male gender (or: 5.0 [95% ci: 1.6-15.5]) and a physically active lifestyle (or: 1.3 [95% ci: 1.1-1.5]). assessment of predictive factors at the first visit enables the pediatrician to identify those patients with severe fatigue who are at risk of a poor outcome. female gender, poor sleep quality, physically inactive lifestyle, and specific somatic complaints were important predictive factors.

suboptimal prenatal growth may adversely influence motor neurophysiologic development and predispose the individual to greater risk of neurodegenerative disorders in later life. we investigated the influences of prenatal growth and the postnatal environment on motor cortical function in young adults. transcranial magnetic stimulation was used to construct corticospinal stimulus-response curves for 35 young adults (mean age: 28 +/- 0.5 years; 19 males) born >or=37 weeks' gestation. birth weight centile was calculated relative to maternal size, parity, ethnicity, gender, and gestation. handgrip strength and dexterity were measured separately. regression analyses assessed the influence of prenatal (birth weight centile and gestation) and postnatal (socioeconomic indices and maternal education) factors on corticospinal parameters, strength, and dexterity scores. lower birth weight was associated with increased interhemispheric asymmetry in motor threshold and increased cortical stimulus-response curve slope. a shorter gestation predicted a larger area under this curve in the right hand. high motor threshold was predicted by greater environmental adversity in early postnatal life, but not by prenatal factors. higher birth weight centile and lower motor threshold were associated with greater educational achievement. poor in utero growth and mild prematurity are associated with altered corticospinal excitability in adulthood. an early postnatal environment with less early postnatal socioeconomic disadvantage and having a mother with a completed high school education partly ameliorates this. while altered cortical development has some functional consequences already evident in early adulthood, it may have a later, additional adverse impact on aging-related changes in motor function.

to determine the frequency and background of conflicts about neonatal end-of-life (eol) decisions. we reviewed the medical files of 359 newborns who had died during 1 year in the 10 dutch nicus and identified 150 deaths that were preceded by an eol decision on the basis of the child's poor prognosis. the attending neonatologists of 147 of the 150 newborns were interviewed to obtain details about the decision-making process. eol decisions about infants with a poor prognosis were initiated mainly by the physician, who subsequently involved the parents. conflicts between parents and the medical team occurred in 18 of 147 cases and were mostly about the child's poor neurologic prognosis. conflicts within the team occurred in 6 of 147 cases and concerned the uncertainty of the prognosis. in the event of conflict, the eol decision was postponed. consensus was reached by calling additional meetings, performing additional diagnostic tests, or obtaining a second opinion. the chief causes of conflict encountered by the physicians were religious convictions that forbade withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment and poor communication between the parents and the team. the parents were involved in all eol decision-making processes, and consensus was ultimately reached in all cases. conflicts within the team occurred in 4% of the cases and between the team and the parents in 12% of the cases. the conflicts were resolved by postponing the eol decision until consensus was achieved.

we compared the frequency of behavioral problems in very preterm and term children at 5 years of age. we hypothesized that behavioral problems would be associated with cognitive impairment and environmental factors and that differences between the 2 groups would be reduced but persist after adjusting for cognitive performance and environmental factors. the etude epidémiologique sur les petits ages gestationnels (epipage) study was a prospective population-based cohort study that included all births occurring between 22 and 32 weeks' gestation and a control group of infants born at 39 to 40 weeks' gestation in 1997 in 9 french regions. neonatal and obstetrics data were collected at birth. at 5 years of age, sociodemographic status and neurodevelopmental and cognitive development of the children, as well as maternal mental well-being, were assessed. the behavioral problems of 1102 very preterm and 375 term singletons without major impairments were studied by using the parent-completed strengths and difficulties questionnaire. parents of very preterm children reported significantly more behavioral problems, with a twofold higher prevalence compared with term children for hyperactivity/inattention, emotional symptoms, and peer problems. behavioral problems were associated with low cognitive performance, developmental delay, hospitalizations of the child, young maternal age, and poor maternal mental well-being. very preterm children were still at higher risk of behavioral problems compared with term children after adjustment for cognitive performance and all others factors. behavioral problems were strongly related to cognitive impairment, but very preterm children were still at higher risk even after adjusting for cognitive performance. early screening for behavioral problems should be encouraged for all very preterm children, and maternal well-being should also be the focus of special attention.

shaken baby syndrome is a term often used by physicians and the public to describe abusive head trauma inflicted on infants and young children. although the term is well known and has been used for a number of decades, advances in the understanding of the mechanisms and clinical spectrum of injury associated with abusive head trauma compel us to modify our terminology to keep pace with our understanding of pathologic mechanisms. although shaking an infant has the potential to cause neurologic injury, blunt impact or a combination of shaking and blunt impact cause injury as well. spinal cord injury and secondary hypoxic ischemic injury can contribute to poor outcomes of victims. the use of broad medical terminology that is inclusive of all mechanisms of injury, including shaking, is required. the american academy of pediatrics recommends that pediatricians develop skills in the recognition of signs and symptoms of abusive head injury, including those caused by both shaking and blunt impact, consult with pediatric subspecialists when necessary, and embrace a less mechanistic term, abusive head trauma, when describing an inflicted injury to the head and its contents.

recent publications showing unexpectedly early breast development in american girls created debate worldwide. however, secular trend analyses are often limited by poor data comparability among studies performed by different researchers in different time periods and populations. here we present new european data systematically collected from the same region and by 1 research group at the beginning and end of the recent 15-year period. girls (n = 2095) aged 5.6 to 20.0 years were studied in 1991-1993 (1991 cohort; n = 1100) and 2006-2008 (2006 cohort; n = 995). all girls were evaluated by palpation of glandular breast, measurement of height and weight, and blood sampling (for estradiol, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone). age distribution at entering pubertal breast stages 2 through 5, pubic hair stages 2 through 5, and menarche was estimated for the 2 cohorts. onset of puberty, defined as mean estimated age at attainment of glandular breast tissue (tanner breast stage 2+), occurred significantly earlier in the 2006 cohort (estimated mean age: 9.86 years) when compared with the 1991 cohort (estimated mean age: 10.88 years). the difference remained significant after adjustment for bmi. estimated ages at menarche were 13.42 and 13.13 years in the 1991 and 2006 cohorts, respectively. serum follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone did not differ between the 2 cohorts at any age interval, whereas significantly lower estradiol levels were found in 8- to 10-year-old girls from the 2006 cohort compared with similarly aged girls from the 1991 cohort. we found significantly earlier breast development among girls born more recently. alterations in reproductive hormones and bmi did not explain these marked changes, which suggests that other factors yet to be identified may be involved.

tuberculous meningitis is the most severe extrapulmonary complication of tuberculosis, with high morbidity and mortality rates. the objective of this study was to assess the relationship between presenting clinical characteristics and outcome of pediatric tuberculous meningitis. we present a retrospective cohort study of all of the children diagnosed with tuberculous meningitis in a large university hospital in south africa between january 1985 and april 2005. we compared demographic, clinical, and diagnostic characteristics with clinical outcome after 6 months of treatment. we included 554 patients. common characteristics on admission were young age (82%; <5 years), stage ii or iii tuberculous meningitis (97%), nonspecific symptoms existing for >1 week (58%), poor weight gain or weight loss (91%), loss of consciousness (96%), motor deficit (63%), meningeal irritation (98%), raised intracranial pressure (23%), brainstem dysfunction (39%), and cranial nerve palsies(27%). common features of tuberculous meningitis on computed tomography scan of the brain were hydrocephalus (82%), periventricular lucency (57%), infarctions(32%), and basal meningeal enhancement (75%). clinical outcome after 6 months was as follows: normal (16%), mild sequelae (52%), severe sequelae (19%), and death (13%). all of the patients diagnosed with stage i tuberculous meningitis had normal outcome. factors associated with poor outcome in univariate analyses were as follows: african ethnicity, young age, hiv coinfection, stage iii tuberculous meningitis, absence of headache and vomiting, convulsions, decreased level of consciousness,motor deficits, cranial nerve palsies, raised intracranial pressure, brain stem dysfunction and radiographic evidence of hydrocephalus, periventricular lucency, and infarction. ethnicity, stage of disease, headache, convulsions, motor function, brainstem dysfunction, and cerebral infarctions were independently associated with poor outcome in multivariate logistic regression analysis. tuberculous meningitis starts with nonspecific symptoms and is often only diagnosed when brain damage has already occurred. earlier diagnosis will improve outcome significantly. we were able to identify presenting variables independently associated with poor clinical outcome.

to calculate the prevalence of developmental coordination disorder at 7 years of age by using diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, fourth edition criteria in a large uk birth cohort. cases of developmental coordination disorder were defined by using data from the avon longitudinal study of parents and children, a uk birth cohort. the motor coordination of >7000 children was assessed by using tests that measured manual dexterity, ball skills, and balance. the 5th percentile of the derived avon longitudinal study of parents and children coordination impairment score was used to define severe motor coordination difficulties. data from national handwriting tests and an activities-of-daily-living scale quantified the impact of poor coordination on daily life. children with known neurologic conditions or an iq of <70 were excluded. complete data were available from 6990 children aged 7 to 8 years who attended the coordination session and completed the writing test or activities-of-daily-living scale. one hundred nineteen children met criteria for developmental coordination disorder, resulting in a prevalence of 17 of 1000 children at a mean age of 7.5 years (sd: 2.9 months). an additional 222 children were considered as having "probable developmental coordination disorder" by using broader cut-offs for coordination testing and activities of daily living. there was an increased risk of developmental coordination disorder in families from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, in children with a birth weight of <2500 g, and those born before 37 weeks' gestation. this is the first study to use strict criteria to define the prevalence of developmental coordination disorder in a representative cohort of uk children. a prevalence of 1.7% is lower than studies that have not taken into account the impact of poor motor coordination on daily living but indicates that poor coordination is an important, and often hidden, cause of disability in childhood.

governments are increasingly using conditional cash transfer programs to reduce the negative effects of poverty on children's development. these programs have demonstrated benefits for children's nutrition and physical development, but the effect of conditional cash transfers on children's behaviors has not been systematically evaluated. the objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of a conditional cash transfer on children's behavior by using a quasi-experimental design. in 1997, the mexican government initiated a large-scale conditional cash transfer (oportunidades) in 506 very poor rural communities. oportunidades provided cash transfers that were contingent on visits to medical practitioners, consumption of nutritional supplementation, and school enrollment. in 2003, an assessment of 4- to 6-year-old children in these households was conducted, and outcomes were compared with children from 152 additional poor rural communities who had been recruited by using rigorous matching procedures. the primary outcome measure for this analysis was maternal report of behavior problems in terms of anxiety/depressive and aggressive/oppositional symptoms. analyses reported here compared 778 children from beneficiary households who had received 3.5 to 5.0 years of exposure to the program and a comparison group of 263 children who had received no exposure to the program at the time of assessment but whose families later enrolled in the program. participation in oportunidades was associated with a 10% decrement in aggressive/oppositional symptoms but was not associated with significant decrements in anxiety/depressive symptoms or total problem behaviors while controlling for covariates. effects of treatment did not differ by children's gender or ethnicity. although this large-scale conditional cash transfer program for poor mexican families did not directly address children's behavior problems, it found evidence of indirect effects on children's behavior. results suggest that interventions that focus on investing in basic human capital needs may exert longer term ripple effects on children's development.

professional guidelines for adolescents recommend annual preventive visits with screening and anticipatory guidance for health-related behaviors. the objective of this study was to examine receipt of preventive services, including disparities in services received, by using a nationally representative sample of adolescents. using data from the 2001-2004 medical expenditure panel survey (ages 10-17; n = 8464), we examined receipt of preventive care visits and several measures of the content of care, based on caregiver's reports, among adolescents who received a preventive care visit during the past 12 months. content of care outcomes included physical parameters measurement (height, weight, and blood pressure); receipt of anticipatory guidance (dental care, seat belts, helmets, exercise, healthy eating, and secondhand smoke exposure); and, for 12- to 17-year-olds, whether adolescents had time alone with their provider during their most recent visit, a proxy for confidential services. we conducted logistic regression analyses to test for disparities in the outcomes on the basis of race/ethnicity, income, and insurance status. thirty-eight percent of adolescents had a preventive care visit in the previous 12 months. low-income and full-year uninsured status were associated with higher risk for not receiving this visit. most adolescents had height (87%), weight (89%), and blood pressure (78%) assessed. rates for height and weight were lower in poor and uninsured adolescents. anticipatory guidance rates were much lower, ranging from 31% for seat belts, helmets, and secondhand smoke to 49% for healthy eating. only 10% had all 6 areas addressed. multivariate analyses yielded few disparities in receipt of anticipatory guidance. forty percent had time alone with their providers. hispanic and the lowest-income adolescents were the least likely to have time alone. few adolescents received a preventive visit; among those who received this visit, provision of recommended anticipatory guidance was very low. strategies are required to improve delivery of recommended preventive services to adolescents.

smoking behavior is strongly influenced by the social environment. more information is needed about how the composition of households with children is associated with adult smoking behavior so that more effective interventions to reduce children's secondhand smoke exposure can be devised and implemented. using data from the medical expenditure panel survey 2000-2004, we conducted cross-sectional analyses to assess how adult smoking behavior is associated with household characteristics, including the number of adults and smokers present, the relationship of the child to the head of household, and relationships between adult members of the household. more than one third (34.4%) of children lived with > or =1 adult smoker. almost half (49.4%) of poor children lived with a smoker, and they were more likely to live with multiple smokers compared with those who lived at >400% of the federal poverty level (21.2% vs 7.8%). approximately 5 million children lived in households headed by an adult other than their parent, and they were significantly more likely to live with smokers: 53.4% of children who lived in their grandparents' homes and 46.2% of children in homes of other adults lived with at least 1 adult smoker, compared with 33.3% who lived in their parents' home. a total of 59.4% of all children who lived with a smoker had a smoking mother, and 56.7% of those children lived with > or =2 smokers, whereas only 17.0% of children whose mother did not smoke had smoking adults in the home. these findings demonstrate the significant influence of household composition on children's likelihood to live in homes with adult smokers.

recent data suggest that that the united states is failing to make significant progress toward the healthy people 2010 goal of eliminating health disparities. one missing element from the us strategy for achieving this goal is a focus on gaps in child development and achievement. academic achievement and education seem to be critical determinants of health across the life span and disparities in one contribute to disparities in the other. despite these linkages, national policy treats child education and health as separate. landmark education legislation, the no child left behind act of 2001, is due for congressional reauthorization. it seeks to eliminate gaps in academic child achievement by 2014. it does so by introducing accountability for states, school districts, and schools. in this special article, we review health disparities and contributors to child achievement gaps. we review changes in achievement gaps over time and potential contributors to the limited success of the no child left behind act of 2001, including its unfunded mandates and unfounded assumptions. we conclude with key reforms, which include addressing gaps in child school readiness through adequate investment in child health and early education and reductions in child poverty; closing the gap in child achievement by ensuring equity in school accountability standards; and, importantly, ensuring equity in school funding so that resources are allocated on the basis of the needs of the students. this will ensure that schools, particularly those serving large numbers of poor and minority children, have the resources necessary to promote optimal learning.

our goals were to compare cognitive, language, behavioral, and educational outcomes of preterm children to term controls and to evaluate the impact of neonatal brain injury, indomethacin, and environmental risk factors on intellectual function at 12 years of age. a total of 375 children born in 1989-1992 with birth weights of 600 to 1250 g enrolled in the indomethacin intraventricular hemorrhage prevention trial and 111 controls were evaluated. neuropsychometric testing, neurologic examination, and interviews on educational needs were completed. severe brain injury was defined as the presence of grade 3 to 4 indomethacin intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, or severe ventriculomegaly on cranial ultrasound. on the wechsler scales of intelligence for children, the preterm cohort obtained a full-scale iq of 87.9 +/- 18.3, verbal iq of 90.8 +/- 18.9, and performance iq of 86.8 +/- 17.9. preterm children obtained scores 6 to 14 points lower than term controls on all psychometric tests after adjustment for sociodemographic factors. on the clinical evaluation of language fundamentals (test of basic language skills), 22% to 24% of preterm children scored in the abnormal ranges (<70) as opposed to 2% to 4% of controls. preterm children with and without brain injury required more school services (76% and 44% vs 16%), and support in reading (44% and 28% vs 9%), writing (44% and 20% vs 4%), and mathematics (47% and 30% vs 6%) compared with controls. preterm children also displayed more behavior problems than their term counterparts. severe neonatal brain injury was the strongest predictor of poor intelligence. antenatal steroids, higher maternal education, and 2-parent family were associated with better cognition, whereas minority status incurred a disadvantage. indomethacin did not affect intellectual function among preterm children. preterm children born in the early 1990s, especially those with severe brain injury, demonstrate serious deficits in their neuropsychological profile, which translates into increased use of school services at 12 years.

given the increase in screen media targeted at the very young, the purpose of this study was to examine preschooler parents' knowledge about expert recommendations for young children's screen media experience, their knowledge of specific screen media ratings, their beliefs about screen media effects, and actual monitoring practices. parents of 94 children <5 years of age (mean age: 2.95 years) were surveyed. questionnaires were distributed in day care centers and completed at the parents' convenience. the questionnaire included background questions about parental education, age and gender of child, and parents' perceptions of their child's favorite television show and favorite video or computer game. eleven multiple-choice questions assessed the respondent's knowledge of expert recommendations for screen media for preschoolers and the meaning of television and video game content ratings. fourteen questions addressed the typical amount of their preschooler's screen media exposure, parental rules regarding screen media use, and parents' beliefs about appropriate use of screen media for preschoolers. preschoolers were exposed to an average of approximately 12 hours of screen media in a typical week. parents believe that media do have either short- or long-term effects on preschoolers. performance on factual questions was poor (mean score: 2.83 of 11). in particular, only 34% of the parents correctly identified the expert recommendation for children >2 years of age. parents should continue to be educated about the need for preschoolers to participate in activities that promote language development, socialization, imagination, and physical activity. although professionals should work to improve the ratings, and ultimately to implement a universal ratings system for all screen media, parents need to be encouraged to improve their understanding of current recommendations for screen media exposure and television and video game ratings.

pediatric severe sepsis remains a significant health problem with hospital mortality up to 10%. however, there is little information about later health outcomes or needs of survivors. therefore, our goal was to evaluate the rates of and risk factors for rehospitalization and late mortality among survivors of pediatric severe sepsis. this was a population-based retrospective cohort study of survivors of pediatric severe sepsis (age 1 month to 18 years) in washington state over the years 1990-2004. the sentinel admission was linked to subsequent death or episodes of hospitalization. the main outcome measures were readmission and/or late death after surviving an initial hospitalization with severe sepsis. risk factors for readmission or death were identified by using a multivariate extended cox model. overall, 7183 children were admitted with severe sepsis, 6.8% of whom died during the sentinel admission or within 28 days of discharge, whereas an additional 6.5% died subsequently. almost half (47%) of the survivors were readmitted at least once (median: 3) after a median of 3 months, and the majority of these readmissions were emergent. sentinel admission factors independently associated with both adverse outcomes were neurologic or hematologic organ dysfunction, government-based insurance, as well as several coexisting health conditions. in addition, age less than 1 year at the time of sepsis and bloodstream and cardiovascular infections were highly associated with subsequent readmission. late death occurred with similar frequency as early death associated with hospitalization with severe sepsis. almost half of the pediatric patients suffering from an episode of severe sepsis had at least 1 subsequent hospitalization, two thirds of which were emergent or urgent. these data suggest that late outcomes after an episode of severe sepsis are poor and call for the evaluation of interventions designed to reduce later morbidity and mortality.

multiple issues play a role in the effective control of childhood asthma. to identify factors related to the level of asthma control in children receiving asthma care from community pediatricians. data for 362 children participating in an intervention study to reduce asthma morbidity were collected by a telephone-administered questionnaire. level of asthma control (well controlled, partially controlled, or poorly controlled) was derived from measures of recent impairment (symptoms, activity limitations, albuterol use) and the number of exacerbations in a 12-month period. data also included demographic characteristics, asthma-related quality of life, pediatric management practices, and medication usage. univariable and multivariable analyses were used to identify factors associated with poor asthma control and to explore the relationship between control and use of daily controller medications. asthma was well controlled for 24% of children, partially controlled for 20%, and poorly controlled for 56%. medicaid insurance, the presence of another family member with asthma, and maternal employment outside the home were significant univariable factors associated with poor asthma control. medicaid insurance had an independent association with poor control. seventy-six percent of children were reported by parents as receiving a daily controller medication. comparison of guideline recommended controller medication with current level of asthma control indicated that a higher step level of medication would have been appropriate for 74% of these children. significantly lower overall quality-of-life scores were observed in both parents and children with poor control. despite substantial use of daily controller medication, children with asthma continue to experience poorly controlled asthma and reduced quality of life. although medicaid insurance and aspects of family structure are significant factors associated with poorly controlled asthma, attention to medication use and quality-of-life indicators may further reduce morbidity.

alternating hemiplegia of childhood is a predominantly sporadic neurodevelopmental syndrome of uncertain etiology. in more than 3 decades since its description, little progress has been made in understanding its etiology or in identifying effective treatments. in 1998, in collaboration with the alternating hemiplegia of childhood foundation, an international registry was established to help document clinical outcomes and promote research efforts. we present phenotypic data on 103 patients who met existing diagnostic criteria for alternating hemiplegia of childhood. although some of these subjects may have been included in previously published reviews, our focus was directed toward the earliest manifestations of symptoms and evolution of features over time. data sources included written questionnaires, face-to-face and telephone interviews, clinical examination, and medical charts. characteristics of disease onset, medical comorbidities, episode triggers, diagnostic workup, and treatment are presented. paroxysmal eye movements were the most frequent early symptom, manifesting in the first 3 months of life in 83% of patients. hemiplegic episodes appeared by 6 months of age in 56% of infants. background slowing shown by electroencephalography during typical paroxysmal events, including hemiplegic, tonic, or dystonic episodes was frequent (21 of 42 cases). distinct convulsive episodes with altered consciousness believed to be epileptic in nature were reported in 41% of patients. ataxia (96%) and cognitive impairment (100%) were frequent nonepisodic symptoms. empiric pharmacologic treatment approaches offered little benefit in most subjects and resulted in adverse effects in 20% of patients. prolonged episodes were completely or temporarily aborted during sleep in all subjects. this descriptive analysis of a large cohort of children indicates that paroxysmal ocular movements are an early, highly suggestive symptom, followed by paroxysmal episodes of focal dystonia or flaccid, alternating hemiplegia in early infancy in the majority of subjects. current challenges in diagnosis and management contribute to poor outcomes. early diagnosis and multicenter collaboration are needed to facilitate trials to identify more effective therapies.

we examined the physical, cognitive, educational, social, and psychological outcomes of invasive meningococcal disease in adolescence, as well as demographic and disease factors associated with outcomes. a population-based, matched-cohort study was performed. a total of 101 gender- and age-matched case-control pairs (15-19 years of age at the time of disease; 46% male) from 6 regions of england underwent follow-up evaluations 18 to 36 months after invasive meningococcal disease. educational, social, and vocational function, mental health, social support, self-efficacy, and quality-of-life data were collected by using standardized questionnaires and neuropsychological tests. fifty-seven percent of case subjects (n = 58) had major physical sequelae. survivors had greater depressive symptoms, greater fatigue, less social support, greater reduction in quality of life, and lower educational attainment compared with control subjects. survivors with serogroup c disease had greater physical sequelae than did those with serogroup b disease. greater cognitive deficits were associated with younger age at diagnosis. only 53 of 101 case subjects reported any medical follow-up care after invasive meningococcal disease. survivors of invasive meningococcal disease in adolescence have a disturbing series of deficits, including poorer physical and mental health, quality of life, and educational achievement. serogroup c is associated with poorer outcomes. invasive meningococcal disease attributable to serogroup b disease remains a major cause of morbidity and death among adolescents. medical care is poor after discharge from the hospital. routine follow-up care of adolescent survivors may prevent or ameliorate physical and psychosocial morbidity after invasive meningococcal disease.

unfractionated heparin is frequently used in tertiary pediatric centers for the prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolic disease. recent evidence suggests that the clinical outcomes of unfractionated heparin therapy in children are poor, as determined by target-range achievement and adverse-event rates. these reports of poor outcomes may be related to an age-dependent mechanism of action of unfractionated heparin. furthermore, several published studies have indicated that unfractionated heparin-monitoring assays currently in clinical use have significant limitations that likely affect the safety and efficacy of anticoagulant management. this review summarizes the growing body of evidence suggesting that pediatric-specific recommendations for unfractionated heparin therapy management are required to improve clinical outcomes related to this commonly prescribed medication.

lateral sinus thrombosis is a rare intracranial complication of otitis media that is traditionally described in countries with poor access to medical care. our goal was to describe the clinical presentation, management, and outcome of patients diagnosed with lateral sinus thrombosis in a us tertiary care center and to highlight the clinically relevant differences in presentation between these patients and those described in previous reports. the medical charts of 13 patients diagnosed with otogenic lateral sinus thrombosis were reviewed. these patients were identified from a manual search of 156 subjects with international classification of diseases, ninth revision codes corresponding with a diagnosis of mastoiditis or thromboembolism over a 10-year period (1997-2007) at the children's hospital of philadelphia. in contrast to previous reports in the literature, the majority of patients in this series exhibited cranial neuropathies and signs of raised intracranial pressure. nearly all of the patients had a history of acute otitis media treated with antibiotics in the weeks preceding admission. however, many patients denied high fevers or active otomastoid symptoms, which are classically associated with lateral sinus thrombosis. the diagnosis was made in all of the children by using computed tomography and mri/venography. treatment strategies included myringotomy tube placement, simple mastoidectomy, intravenous antibiotics, and anticoagulation. posthospitalization follow-up data revealed no significant long-term complications. despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, lateral sinus thrombosis and other intracranial complications of otitis media are still a threat to children in the modern era. neurologic, rather than otologic, symptoms may dominate the presentation of otogenic lateral sinus thrombosis. thus, a high index of suspicion may be critical for ensuring timely diagnosis of this rare condition.

the purpose of this work was to evaluate therapy for patent ductus arteriosus as a risk factor for death or neurodevelopmental impairment at 18 to 22 months, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or necrotizing enterocolitis in extremely low birth weight infants. we studied infants in the national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network generic data base born between 2000 and 2004 at 23 to 28 weeks' gestation and at <1000-g birth weight with patent ductus arteriosus. patent ductus arteriosus therapy was evaluated as a risk factor for outcomes in bivariable and multivariable analyses. treatment for subjects with patent ductus arteriosus (n = 2838) included 403 receiving supportive treatment only, 1525 treated with indomethacin only, 775 with indomethacin followed by secondary surgical closure, and 135 treated with primary surgery. patients who received supportive therapy for patent ductus arteriosus did not differ from subjects treated with indomethacin only for any of the outcomes of interest. compared with indomethacin treatment only, patients undergoing primary or secondary surgery were smaller and more premature. when compared with indomethacin alone, primary surgery was associated with increased adjusted odds for neurodevelopmental impairment and bronchopulmonary dysplasia in multivariable logistic regression. secondary surgical closure was associated with increased odds for neurodevelopmental impairment and increased adjusted odds for bronchopulmonary dysplasia but decreased adjusted odds for death. risk of necrotizing enterocolitis did not differ among treatments. indomethacin prophylaxis did not significantly modify these results. our results suggest that infants treated with primary or secondary surgery for patent ductus arteriosus may be at increased risk for poor short- and long-term outcomes compared with those treated with indomethacin. prophylaxis with indomethacin in the first 24 hours of life did not modify the subsequent outcomes of patent ductus arteriosus therapy.

we aimed to determine the effectiveness of school-based supervised asthma therapy in improving asthma control. the primary hypothesis was that the supervised-therapy group would have a smaller proportion of children experiencing an episode of poor asthma control each month, compared with those in the usual-care group. children were eligible if they had physician-diagnosed persistent asthma, the need for daily controller medication, and the ability to use a dry-powder inhaler and a peak flowmeter. the trial used a 2-group, randomized, longitudinal design with a 15-month follow-up period. a total of 290 children from 36 schools were assigned randomly to either school-based, supervised therapy or usual care. ninety-one percent of the children were black, and 57% were male. the mean age was 11 years (sd: 2.1 years). an episode of poor asthma control was defined as > or =1 of the following each month: (1) an absence from school attributable to respiratory illness/asthma; (2) average use of rescue medication >2 times per week (not including preexercise treatment); or (3) > or =1 red or yellow peak flowmeter reading. two hundred forty children completed the study. there were no differences in the likelihood of an episode of poor asthma control between the baseline period and the follow-up period for the usual-care group. for the supervised-therapy group, however, the odds of experiencing an episode of poor asthma control during the baseline period were 1.57 times the odds of experiencing an episode of poor asthma control during the follow-up period. generalized estimating equation modeling revealed a marginally significant intervention-time period interaction, indicating that children in the supervised-therapy group showed greater improvement in asthma control. supervised asthma therapy improves asthma control. clinicians who have pediatric patients with asthma with poor outcomes that may be attributable to nonadherence should consider supervised therapy.

we examined the diagnostic accuracy of routine imaging studies (ultrasonography and micturating cystography) for predicting long-term parenchymal renal damage after a first febrile urinary tract infection. this study addressed the secondary objective of a prospective trial evaluating different antibiotic regimens for the treatment of acute pyelonephritis. data for 300 children < or =2 years of age, with normal prenatal ultrasound results, who completed the diagnostic follow-up evaluation (ultrasonography and technetium-99m-dimercaptosuccinic acid scanning within 10 days, cystography within 2 months, and repeat technetium-99m-dimercaptosuccinic acid scanning at 12 months to detect scarring) were analyzed. outcome measures were sensitivity, specificity, and negative and positive predictive values for ultrasonography and cystography in predicting parenchymal renal damage on the 12-month technetium-99m-dimercaptosuccinic acid scans. the kidneys and urinary tracts were mostly normal. the acute technetium-99m-dimercaptosuccinic acid scans showed pyelonephritis in 54% of cases. renal scarring developed in 15% of cases. the ultrasonographic and cystographic findings were poor predictors of long-term damage, showing minor sonographic abnormalities for 12 and reflux for 23 of the 45 children who subsequently developed scarring. the benefit of performing ultrasonography and scintigraphy in the acute phase or cystourethrography is minimal. our findings support (1) technetium-99m-dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy 6 months after infection to detect scarring that may be related to long-term hypertension, proteinuria, and renal function impairment (although the degree of scarring was generally minor and did not impair renal function) and (2) continued surveillance to identify recurrent urinary tract infections that may warrant further investigation.

from a large series of 1009 probands with pathogenic fbn1 mutations, data for 320 patients <18 years of age at the last follow-up evaluation were analyzed (32%). at the time of diagnosis, the median age was 6.5 years. at the last examination, the population was classified as follows: neonatal marfan syndrome, 14%; severe marfan syndrome, 19%; classic marfan syndrome, 32%; probable marfan syndrome, 35%. seventy-one percent had ascending aortic dilation, 55% ectopia lentis, and 28% major skeletal system involvement. even when aortic complications existed in childhood, the rates of aortic surgery and aortic dissection remained low (5% and 1%, respectively). some diagnostic features (major skeletal system involvement, striae, dural ectasia, and family history) were more frequent in the 10- to <18-year age group, whereas others (ascending aortic dilation and mitral abnormalities) were more frequent in the population with neonatal marfan syndrome. only 56% of children could be classified as having marfan syndrome, according to international criteria, at their last follow-up evaluation when the presence of a fbn1 mutation was not considered as a major feature, with increasing frequency in the older age groups. eighty-five percent of child probands fulfilled international criteria after molecular studies, which indicates that the discovery of a fbn1 mutation can be a valuable diagnostic aid in uncertain cases. the distributions of mutation types and locations in this pediatric series revealed large proportions of probands carrying mutations located in exons 24 to 32 (33%) and in-frame mutations (75%). apart from lethal neonatal marfan syndrome, we confirm that the majority of clinical manifestations of marfan syndrome increase with age, which emphasizes the poor applicability of the international criteria to this diagnosis in childhood and the need for follow-up monitoring in cases of clinical suspicion of marfan syndrome.

a count of 3 neonatal morbidities (bronchopulmonary dysplasia, brain injury, and severe retinopathy of prematurity) strongly predict the risk of death or neurosensory impairment in extremely low birth weight infants who survive to 36 weeks' postmenstrual age. neonatal infection has also been linked with later impairment. we examined whether the addition of infection to the count of 3 neonatal morbidities further improves the prediction of poor outcome. we studied 944 infants who participated in the trial of indomethacin prophylaxis in preterms and survived to 36 weeks' postmenstrual age. culture-proven sepsis, meningitis, and stage ii or iii necrotizing enterocolitis were recorded prospectively. we investigated the incremental prognostic importance of neonatal infection by adding terms for the different types of infection to a logistic model that already contained terms for the count of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, brain injury, and severe retinopathy. poor outcome at 18 months of age was death or survival with 1 or more of the following: cerebral palsy, cognitive delay, severe hearing loss, and bilateral blindness. there were 414 (44%) infants with at least 1 episode of infection or necrotizing enterocolitis. meningitis and the presence of any type of infection added independent prognostic information to the morbidity-count model. the odds ratio associated with infection or necrotizing enterocolitis in this model was 50% smaller than the odds ratio associated with each count of the other 3 neonatal morbidities. meningitis was rare and occurred in 22 (2.3%) of 944 infants. in this cohort of extremely low birth weight infants who survived to 36 weeks' postmenstrual age, neonatal infection increased the risk of a late death or survival with neurosensory impairment. however, infection was a weaker predictor of poor outcome than bronchopulmonary dysplasia, brain injury, and severe retinopathy.

extremely preterm infants are at risk for poor growth and impaired neurodevelopment. the objective of this study was to determine whether intrauterine, early neonatal, or postdischarge growth is associated with neurocognitive and motor-developmental outcome in extremely preterm infants. surviving children who were born between july 1996 and june 1999 at <30 weeks' gestation and with a birth weight <1500 g were evaluated at the age of school entry by application of (1) a standardized neurologic evaluation, (2) the kaufmann assessment battery for children, and (3) the gross motor function classification scale. growth was assessed on the basis of sd scores of weight and head circumference measured at birth, at discharge, and at the time of the follow-up examination. all infants had received intensive early nutritional support. a total of 219 (83%) of 263 long-term survivors were evaluated at a median corrected age of 5.4 years. increasing sd scores for weight and head circumference from birth to discharge were associated with a reduced risk for an abnormal neurologic examination. catch-up growth of head circumference from birth to discharge was also associated with a reduced risk for impaired mobility. weight sd score at birth, an increase of weight sd score from birth to discharge, and an increase of head circumference sd score from discharge to follow-up had an effect on the mental processing composite score. the effects of growth on neurodevelopment were by far exceeded by the consequences of intraventricular and periventricular hemorrhage. growth from birth to discharge seemed to be associated with long-term motor development. cognitive development was associated with intrauterine growth measured as weight at birth, early neonatal weight gain, and postdischarge head circumference growth. improving particularly early neonatal growth may improve long-term outcome in extremely preterm infants, but the effects of improved growth may only be small.

the goals were to examine the frequency of perinatal manifestations of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation disorders within a population-based cohort, to characterize these manifestations, to identify a possible association between these manifestations and diagnoses at a later age, and to identify possible associations between perinatal complications and specific disorders. we conducted a retrospective review of clinical and laboratory records for all patients with definitive oxidative phosphorylation disorders who were diagnosed and treated at the royal children's hospital in melbourne between 1975 and 2006 (n = 107; male/female ratio: 1.41). neonatal presentation was recorded for 32 of 107 patients (male/female ratio: 1:1), including 19 who presented on day 1 of life. prematurity (gestational age of <37 weeks) was noted for 12.6% of the 107 patients. of the 85 infants with known birth weights, 24 were in the g mutation. oxidative phosphorylation disorders present commonly in the neonatal period. the combination of nonspecific manifestations such as prematurity and intrauterine growth retardation with early postnatal decompensation or poor feeding or vomiting and persistent lactic acidosis should suggest the possibility of an oxidative phosphorylation disorder.

the goal was to determine whether cumulative exposure to violence in childhood and adolescence contributes to disparities in self-rated health among a nationally representative sample of us adolescents. the national longitudinal survey of youth 1997 is an ongoing, 8-year (1997-2004), longitudinal, cohort study of youths who were 12 to 18 years of age at baseline (n = 8224). generalized estimating equations were constructed to investigate the relationship between cumulative exposure to violence and risk for poor health. at baseline, 75% of subjects reported excellent or very good health, 21.5% reported good health, and 4.5% reported fair or poor health. cumulative violence exposures (witnessed gun violence, threat of violence, repeated bullying, perceived safety, and criminal victimization) were associated with a graded increase in risk for poor health and reduced the strength of the relationship between household income and poor health. in comparison with subjects with no violence exposure, risk for poor self-rated health was 4.6 times greater among subjects who reported >or=5 forms of cumulative exposure to violence, controlling for demographic features and household income. trend analysis revealed that, for each additional violence exposure, the risk of poor health increased by 38%. adjustment for alcohol use, drug use, smoking, depressive symptoms, and family and neighborhood environment reduced the strength of the relationships between household income and cumulative exposure to violence scores and poor self-rated health, which suggests partial mediation of the effects of socioeconomic status and cumulative exposure to violence by these factors. in this nationally representative sample, social inequality in risk for poor self-rated health during the transition from adolescence to adulthood was partially attributable to disparities in cumulative exposure to violence. a strong graded association was noted between cumulative exposure to violence and poor self-rated health in adolescence and young adulthood.

we assessed influenza vaccination rates from 1992 to 2002, individual continuity of vaccination, and missed opportunities for vaccination in adolescents with high-risk conditions. we performed a retrospective observational study of 18 703 adolescents with high-risk conditions who were enrolled in a large health maintenance organization and received care at a multisite practice for >or=1 influenza season and the preceding year, between 1992 and 2002, was performed. subjects were identified as having a high-risk condition if they had >or=1 visit with an associated international classification of diseases, ninth revision, clinical modification code during the season or previous year. influenza vaccination rates were compared by season in logistic regression analyses, using generalized estimating equations for repeated measurements of subjects enrolled for multiple seasons. vaccination continuity was measured for adolescents who were enrolled for 4 consecutive seasons (1999-2002) as the number of seasons during which vaccine was received. missed opportunities were defined as visits during the first 4 months of influenza season at which an unvaccinated adolescent did not receive vaccine. for adolescents with high-risk conditions, influenza vaccination rates varied from 8.3% to 15.4%. rates improved significantly from 1992 to 1993, from 8.3% to 12.8%, and again in 2001, reaching 15.4%. only 11.1% of those enrolled continuously from 1999 to 2002 received vaccine during all 4 seasons. according to season from 1992 to 2002, 45.7% to 53.6% of unvaccinated subjects had >or=1 missed opportunity. influenza vaccination rates in adolescents with high-risk conditions improved from 1992 to 2002 but were still low in recent years. individual vaccination continuity was poor. numerous opportunities already exist for improving coverage.

household energy security has not been measured empirically or related to child health and development but is an emerging concern for clinicians and researchers as energy costs increase. the objectives of this study were to develop a clinical indicator of household energy security and assess associations with food security, health, and developmental risk in children <36 months of age. a cross-sectional study that used household survey and surveillance data was conducted. caregivers were interviewed in emergency departments and primary care clinics form january 2001 through december 2006 on demographics, public assistance, food security, experience with heating/cooling and utilities, parents evaluation of developmental status, and child health. the household energy security indicator includes energy-secure, no energy problems; moderate energy insecurity, utility shutoff threatened in past year; and severe energy insecurity, heated with cooking stove, utility shutoff, or >or=1 day without heat/cooling in past year. the main outcome measures were household and child food security, child reported health status, parents evaluation of developmental status concerns, and hospitalizations. of 9721 children, 11% (n = 1043) and 23% (n = 2293) experienced moderate and severe energy insecurity, respectively. versus children with energy security, children with moderate energy insecurity had greater odds of household food insecurity, child food insecurity, hospitalization since birth, and caregiver report of child fair/poor health, adjusted for research site and mother, child, and household characteristics. children with severe energy insecurity had greater adjusted odds of household food insecurity, child food insecurity, caregivers reporting significant developmental concerns on the parents evaluation of developmental status scale, and report of child fair/poor health. no significant association was found between energy security and child weight for age or weight for length. as household energy insecurity increases, infants and toddlers experienced increased odds of household and child food insecurity and of reported poor health, hospitalizations, and developmental risks.

amputation is an infrequent but devastating outcome of meningococcal septicemia. we assessed daily living functions and quality of life in a cohort of children and young people, 3 to 5 years after limb amputations following severe meningococcal disease. all participants lived with their families in the community, with minimal assistance. participants used effective strategies to compensate for motor impairment and generally had good quality of life, despite ongoing health problems (predominantly musculoskeletal). the degree of amputation did not predict the functional outcome. the surprisingly good outcomes we report should discourage clinicians from withdrawing intensive care support because of presumed poor outcomes after multiple amputations in severe meningococcal disease.

the goal was to test whether extremely preterm children have more pervasive behavior problems than classroom peers, by using parent and teacher consensus reports. is there an excess number of extremely preterm boys with behavior problems? a total-population study of all extremely preterm children in the united kingdom and ireland was performed. all children born at =25 weeks of gestation in the united kingdom and ireland between march and december 1995 were assessed at 76 months of age (range: 62-87 months) (epicure study). pervasive behavior problems were defined as scoring >90th percentile on parent and teacher reports with a standard behavior scale, the strengths and difficulties questionnaire. of the 241 of 308 survivors who responded (78% of survivors), 200 had full reports on behavior problems from teachers and parents; they were compared with 148 control children. a total of 19.4% of extremely preterm children (boys: 23.2%; girls: 15.6%), compared with 3.4% of control children (boys: 4.6%; girls: 2.5%) had total behavior scores in the clinical range. hyperactivity (extremely preterm: 30.6%; control: 8.8%) and conduct problems (extremely preterm: 12.5%; control: 5.4%) could be accounted for by cognitive deficits, but attention (extremely preterm: 33.3%; control: 6.8%), peer (extremely preterm: 25.4%; control: 5.4%), and emotional (extremely preterm: 13.5%; control: 4.1%) problems were not explained by poor cognitive functioning. extremely preterm boys had behavior problems in excess of gender differences found in the control group in hyperactivity, attention, and prosocial problems, and the impact on parents and teachers was greater for extremely preterm boys than girls. pervasive behavior problems are more frequent in children born at the limits of viability than previously reported for larger preterm populations. extremely preterm boys seem most vulnerable, and the impact on parents and teachers is considerable.

retinoblastoma is curable when diagnosed early and treated appropriately; however, the prognosis is dismal when the basic elements of diagnosis and treatment are lacking. in developing countries, poor education, lower socioeconomic conditions, and inefficient health care systems result in delayed diagnosis and suboptimal care. furthermore, the complexity of multidisciplinary care required is seldom possible. whereas ocular salvage is a priority in the western world, death from retinoblastoma is still a major problem in developing countries. to bring the 2 ends of this spectrum together and provide a forum for discussion, the "one world, one vision" symposium was organized, at which clinicians and researchers from various cultural, geographic, and socioeconomic backgrounds converged to discuss their experiences. strategies for early diagnosis in developing countries were discussed. elements of the development of retinoblastoma centers in developing countries were discussed, and examples of successful programs were highlighted. an important component in this process is twinning between centers in developing countries and mentor institutions in high-income countries. global initiatives by nongovernmental organizations such as the international network for cancer treatment and research, orbis international, and the international agency for prevention of blindness were presented. treatment of retinoblastoma in developing countries remains a challenge; however, it is possible to coordinate efforts at multiple levels, including public administrations and nonprofit organizations, to improve the diagnosis and treatment of retinoblastoma and to improve the outcome for these children.

nicotine nasal spray has been 1 of the most successful forms of nicotine-replacement therapy in adult populations. the nasal sprayer has not been studied in adolescent smokers. the objective of this pilot study was to determine the feasibility and utility of using nicotine nasal spray for adolescent smokers who wanted to quit smoking. forty adolescent smokers who were between 15 and 18 years of age and smoked >/=5 cigarettes daily for at least 6 months were recruited from several san francisco bay area schools from 2005 to 2007. using a randomized, open-label, 12-week trial, adolescent smokers were assigned to receive either weekly counseling alone (control) for 8 weeks or 8 weeks of counseling along with 6 weeks of nicotine nasal spray. self-reported smoking abstinence was verified by both expired-air carbon monoxide and salivary cotinine. there was no difference in cessation rates, the numbers of cigarettes smoked per day, or cotinine levels at 12 weeks. fifty-seven percent of participants stopped using their spray after only 1 week. the most commonly reported adverse effect was nasal irritation and burning (34.8%) followed by complaints about the taste and smell (13%). the unpleasant adverse effects, poor adherence, and consequent lack of efficacy observed in our pilot study do not support the use of nicotine nasal spray as an adjunct to counseling for adolescent smokers who wish to quit.

the ability of employed parents to meet the health needs of their children may depend on their access to sick leave, especially for low-income workers, who may be afforded less flexibility in their work schedules to accommodate these needs yet also more likely to have children in poor health. our goal was to provide rates of access to paid sick leave and paid vacation leave among low-income families with children and to assess whether access to these benefits is associated with parents' leave taking to care for themselves or others. we used a sample of low-income families (<200% of the federal poverty level) with children aged 0 to 17 years in the 2003 and 2004 medical expenditure panel survey to examine bivariate relationships between access to and use of paid leave and characteristics of children, families, and parents' employer. access to paid leave was lower among children in low-income families than among those in families with higher income. within low-income families, children without >or=1 full-time worker in the household were especially likely to lack access to this benefit, as were children whose parents work for small employers. among children whose parents had access to paid sick leave, parents were more likely to take time away from work to care for themselves or others. this relationship is even more pronounced among families with the highest need, such as children in fair or poor health and children with all parents in full-time employment. legislation mandating paid sick leave could dramatically increase access to this benefit among low-income families. it would likely diminish gaps in parents' leave taking to care for others between families with and without the benefit. however, until the health-related consequences are better understood, the full impact of such legislation remains unknown.

the objective of this study was to determine whether caregivers had given infants who died unexpectedly over-the-counter cough and cold medications before the infant deaths to identify sociodemographic risk factors for their use. the arizona child fatality review program reviews the circumstances surrounding every child death that occurs in the state each year. by statute, the multidisciplinary review teams have access to all medical charts, autopsy reports, law enforcement reports, and other records for their review and use these data to determine the cause of death and its preventability. the data on all infants who died unexpectedly in 2006 and had an autopsy and postmortem toxicologic studies were reviewed for this analysis. ten unexpected infant deaths that were associated with cold-medication use were identified. the infants ranged in age from 17 days to 10 months. postmortem toxicology testing found evidence of recent administration of pseudoephedrine, antihistamine, dextromethorphan, and/or other cold-medication ingredients in these infants. the families who used these medications were poor and publicly insured, and 50% of them had limited english proficiency. only 4 of these infants had received medical care for their current illness before their death. the over-the-counter cough and cold medication had been prescribed by a clinician for only 1 of these infants. review of these infants' deaths raises concern about the role of the over-the-counter cough and cold medications in these deaths. these findings support the recommendation that such medications not be given to infants. in addition, these findings suggest that warnings on these medications "to consult a clinician" before use are not being followed by parents. educational campaigns to decrease the use of over-the-counter cough and cold medications in infants need to be increased.

the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome (online mendelian inheritance in man no. 606232) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that includes hypotonia, severely impaired development of speech and language, autistic-like behavior, and minor dysmorphic features. although the number of reported cases is increasing, the 22q13.3 deletion remains underdiagnosed because of failure in recognizing the clinical phenotype and detecting the 22qter deletion by routine chromosome analyses. our goal is to contribute to the description of the neurobehavioral phenotype and brain abnormalities of this microdeletional syndrome. we assessed neuromotor, sensory, language, communication, and social development and performed cerebral mri and study of regional cerebral blood flow measured by positron emission tomography in 8 children carrying the 22q13.3 deletion. despite variability in expression and severity, the children shared a common developmental profile characterized by hypotonia, sleep disorders, and poor response to their environment in early infancy; expressive language deficit contrasting with emergence of social reciprocity from ages approximately 3 to 5 years; sensory processing dysfunction; and neuromotor disorders. brain mri findings were normal or showed a thin or morphologically atypical corpus callosum. positron emission tomography study detected a localized dysfunction of the left temporal polar lobe and amygdala hypoperfusion. the developmental course of the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome belongs to pervasive developmental disorders but is distinct from autism. an improved description of the natural history of this syndrome should help in recognizing this largely underdiagnosed condition.

pediatric hiv infection is a growing problem in most regions of the world. data on the effects of hiv on the neurodevelopment of children in resource-poor settings are scarce but necessary to guide interventions. the purpose of this study was to compare the neurodevelopment of preschool-aged hiv-infected, hiv-affected (hiv-uninfected aids orphans and hiv-uninfected children whose mother had symptomatic aids), and healthy control children in kinshasa, democratic republic of congo. thirty-five hiv-infected, 35 hiv-affected, and 90 control children aged 18 to 72 months were assessed by using the bayley scales of infant development ii, peabody developmental motor scales, snijders-oomen nonverbal intelligence test, and rossetti infant-toddler language scale, as appropriate for age. overall, 60% of hiv-infected children had severe delay in cognitive function, 29% had severe delay in motor skills, 85% had delays in language expression, and 77% had delays in language comprehension, all significantly higher rates as compared with control children. young hiv-infected children (aged 18-29 months) performed worse, with 91% and 82% demonstrating severe mental and motor delay, respectively, compared with 46% and 4% in older hiv-infected children (aged 30-72 months). hiv-affected children had significantly more motor and language expression delay than control children. the impact of the hiv pandemic on children's neurodevelopment extends beyond the direct effect of the hiv virus on the central nervous system. aids orphans and hiv-negative children whose mothers had aids demonstrated significant delays in their neurodevelopment, although to a lesser degree and in fewer developmental domains than hiv-infected children. young hiv-infected children were the most severely afflicted group, indicating the need for early interventions. older children performed better as a result of a "survival effect," with only those children with less aggressive disease surviving.

little is known about sleep patterns and problems in chinese adolescents. this study was designed to examine sleep/wake patterns and problems and their associations with parent sleep among adolescents in china. this report represents part of an epidemiological study of sleep and health in 6 high schools in jinan city, china. a total of 1056 adolescents and 838 parents completed a questionnaire in march or april 2005. participants consisted of 625 boys and 441 girls, 557 seventh-graders (mean age: 13.5 +/- 0.6 years) and 509 tenth-graders (mean age: 16.4 +/- 0.7 years), and 603 mothers and 235 fathers. adolescents and parents reported their own sleep/wake patterns and problems. average morning rising time (5:56 am vs 8:13 am) and sleep duration (7.5 hours vs 9.4 hours) differed significantly between weekdays and weekends. compared with seventh-graders, 10th-graders went to bed later and awoke earlier, resulting in approximately 1 hour of sleep less. of the adolescents, 18.8% reported their sleep quality as poor, 26.2% were not satisfied with their sleep, 16.1% had insomnia, and 17.9% had daytime sleepiness. significant but low adolescent-parent correlations were observed for sleep/wake patterns and perceived sleep quality. difficulty initiating sleep in adolescents was significantly associated with history of insomnia in mothers and fathers. sleep insufficiency, insomnia, and daytime sleepiness are prevalent in chinese adolescents. sleep insufficiency on weekdays may be attributable to earlier morning rising to meet school schedules. parental history of insomnia is associated with elevated risk for insomnia symptoms in adolescent offspring, although adolescent-parent correlations in sleep/wake patterns are relatively low.

fifty-five million americans speak a non-english primary language at home, but little is known about health disparities for children in non-english-primary-language households. our study objective was to examine whether disparities in medical and dental health, access to care, and use of services exist for children in non-english-primary-language households. the national survey of childhood health was a telephone survey in 2003-2004 of a nationwide sample of parents of 102 353 children 0 to 17 years old. disparities in medical and oral health and health care were examined for children in a non-english-primary-language household compared with children in english- primary-language households, both in bivariate analyses and in multivariable analyses that adjusted for 8 covariates (child's age, race/ethnicity, and medical or dental insurance coverage, caregiver's highest educational attainment and employment status, number of children and adults in the household, and poverty status). children in non-english-primary-language households were significantly more likely than children in english-primary-language households to be poor (42% vs 13%) and latino or asian/pacific islander. significantly higher proportions of children in non-english-primary-language households were not in excellent/very good health (43% vs 12%), were overweight/at risk for overweight (48% vs 39%), had teeth in fair/poor condition (27% vs 7%), and were uninsured (27% vs 6%), sporadically insured (20% vs 10%), and lacked dental insurance (39% vs 20%). children in non-english-primary-language households more often had no usual source of medical care (38% vs 13%), made no medical (27% vs 12%) or preventive dental (14% vs 6%) visits in the previous year, and had problems obtaining specialty care (40% vs 23%). latino and asian children in non-english-primary-language households had several unique disparities compared with white children in non-english-primary-language households. almost all disparities persisted in multivariable analyses. compared with children in english-primary-language households, children in non-english-primary-language households experienced multiple disparities in medical and oral health, access to care, and use of services.

children with traumatic brain injuries often show impaired executive function (the ability to carry out goal-directed behavior). the behavior rating inventory of executive function, a caregiver-report questionnaire, measures executive function in everyday activities. in this study, our goal was to use the behavior rating inventory of executive function to document changes in children's executive function in the first year after traumatic brain injury and identify child, family, and injury variables associated with greater dysfunction. we predicted that children with traumatic brain injury would have more executive dysfunction than children hospitalized for orthopedic fractures and that more severe traumatic brain injury would predict greater dysfunction. children's premorbid functioning and family characteristics were expected to moderate their executive function. caregivers of children aged 5 to 15 years (330 mild-to-severe traumatic brain injury, 103 control orthopedic fractures) enrolled onto a longitudinal study of executive function. caregivers completed the behavior rating inventory of executive function by telephone at baseline (obtained retrospectively) and 3 months and 1 year after the injury. traumatic brain injury groups and controls showed no baseline differences in behavior rating inventory of executive function scores. three months after the injury, children with traumatic brain injury had more dysfunction than controls on the global executive composite. one year after injury, all traumatic brain injury groups differed from the controls on the behavioral regulation index, metacognition index, and global executive composite. the working memory scale was the only scale to discriminate between the control group and all 3 traumatic brain injury severity groups at both 3 and 12 months after injury. executive-function ratings remained stable from 3 to 12 months after injury. across time points, preexisting learning/behavior problems, lower respondent education, and poor family functioning predicted greater global executive composite dysfunction. between 18% and 38% of the children with traumatic brain injury had significant executive dysfunction in the first year after injury, with greater dysfunction reported for children with more severe traumatic brain injury. our findings support previous reports that preinjury learning and behavior problems, limited family resources, and poor family functioning adversely affect executive function. these results suggest a need for more systematic screening for executive dysfunction after traumatic brain injury to increase recognition of cognitive disability and improve access to appropriate services.

unintentional injury is the leading cause of death among toddlers in the united states. toddlers spend the majority of time at home, and the use of recommended safety practices can prevent many injuries. maternal psychological adjustment and understanding of child development are thought to influence the implementation of safety practices; however, the extent to which either factor is related has been examined with small samples and without attention to potential confounding. we hypothesize that mothers' use of safety practices will be higher when mothers have more knowledge of development and better psychological adjustment. this study is part of the family life project, a longitudinal birth cohort of children from poor rural communities (n = 1611) and an ethnographic sample (n = 36). mothers in the birth cohort completed scales to measure knowledge of development, psychological adjustment, and home safety practices. factor analysis of the safety scale resulted in 4 subscales. each subscale was predicted from maternal knowledge and adjustment in multivariable regression. mothers in the ethnographic study described sources of information about home safety, current practices, and barriers. analyses indicated that mothers with better psychological adjustment were more likely to implement all of the safety practices, and mothers with more knowledge about development were more likely to minimize subtle hazards and install safety devices. an interaction between maternal adjustment and knowledge suggested that mothers with psychological distress were more likely to install safety devices if they had greater knowledge of development. mothers reported that health care providers were the primary source of safety information, and barriers to implementation included poverty and lack of stable housing. knowledge of development and better psychological adjustment are associated with improved home safety. knowledge about development is especially important for mothers with poor mental health. pediatricians and designers of injury-prevention programs should consider the role of maternal mental health in child safety.

extremely preterm birth is associated with adverse neurodevelopmental sequelae. head circumference has been used as a measure of brain growth. there are limited data relating head circumference to mri. the purpose of this work was to establish the relationship between head circumference with brain mri at term-equivalent age and to relate head circumference with neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years. two hundred and twenty-seven preterm infants (birth weight of <1250 g or <30 weeks' gestation) were recruited. head circumference was measured at birth, term, and 2 years' corrected age, and z scores were computed. microcephaly was defined as a head circumference z score of less than -2 sds for age and gender. mri scans at term (n = 214) were graded for white and gray matter abnormalities, and segmented volumes were calculated for different tissue types. outcome at 2 years' corrected age (n = 202) included scores on the bayley scales of infant development ii. microcephaly increased from 7.5% at term to 29.7% at 2 years. there was no significant relationship between head circumference and white or gray matter abnormalities on mri. there was a strong correlation between head circumference and brain volume at term. at term, microcephalic infants had significantly decreased volumes for total brain tissue and most segmented volumes compared with infants with normal head circumference, but only deep nuclear gray matter volume remained significantly lower when adjusted for total intracranial volume. at 2 years, microcephaly was associated with poorer cognitive and motor development and an increased rate of cerebral palsy. brain volume is a determinant of head size at term. microcephaly is associated with a reduction of brain tissue volumes, especially deep nuclear gray matter, which suggests a selective vulnerability. poor postnatal head growth in preterm infants becomes more evident by 2 years and is strongly associated with poor neurodevelopmental outcome and cerebral palsy.

the goals of this study were to (1) develop an approach to ascertain birth asphyxia deaths by using verbal autopsy data from a community-based setting in nepal, and (2) explore variations in birth asphyxia mortality fractions by using different birth asphyxia case definitions and hierarchical classifications. data were prospectively collected during a cluster-randomized, community-based trial of health interventions on neonatal mortality in sarlahi, nepal from 2002 to 2006. to assign cause of death, 4 computer-assigned, symptom-based asphyxia case definitions; nepali physician classification; and our independent review of verbal autopsy open narratives were used. various hierarchical classification approaches to assign cause of death were also explored. birth asphyxia specific mortality ranged from 26% to 54%, depending on the computer case definition used. there was poor agreement between computer and physician classification of birth asphyxia. by comparing computer results, physician results, and our independent ascertainment of cause of death, we identified 246 cases of birth asphyxia (32% of neonatal deaths). allowing for >1 cause of death, 30% and 42% of asphyxia cases also met criteria for prematurity and serious infection, respectively. when a hierarchy was used to assign a single cause of death, the birth asphyxia proportionate mortality was reduced to 12% when identification of deaths because of congenital anomalies, prematurity, and serious infections preceded birth asphyxia. the use of various verbal autopsy definitions and hierarchical approaches to assign cause of death may substantially affect estimates of birth asphyxia-specific mortality and analyses of risk factors. verbal autopsy methods need to be standardized and validated to generate accurate global estimates to direct policy and resource allocation in low-middle-income countries.

the purpose of this work was to determine the prevalence and predictors of diabetic ketoacidosis at the diagnosis of diabetes in a large sample of youth from the us population. the search for diabetes in youth study, a multicenter, population-based registry of diabetes with diagnosis before 20 years of age, identified 3666 patients with new onset of diabetes in the study areas in 2002-2004. medical charts were reviewed in 2824 (77%) of the patients in a standard manner to abstract the results of laboratory tests and to ascertain diabetic ketoacidosis at the time of diagnosis. diabetic ketoacidosis was defined by blood bicarbonate <15 mmol/l and/or venous ph < 7.25 (arterial/capillary ph < 7.30), international classification of diseases, ninth revision, code 250.1, or listing of diabetic ketoacidosis in the medical chart. more than half (54%) of the patients were hospitalized at diagnosis, including 93% of those with diabetic ketoacidosis and 41% without diabetic ketoacidosis. the prevalence of diabetic ketoacidosis at the diagnosis was 25.5%. the prevalence decreased with age from 37.3% in children aged 0 to 4 years to 14.7% in those aged 15 to 19 years. diabetic ketoacidosis prevalence was significantly higher in patients with type 1 (29.4%) rather than in those with type 2 diabetes (9.7%). after adjusting for the effects of center, age, gender, race or ethnicity, diabetes type, and family history of diabetes, diabetic ketoacidosis at diagnosis was associated with lower family income, less desirable health insurance coverage, and lower parental education. at the time of diagnosis, 1 in 4 youth presents with diabetic ketoacidosis. those with diabetic ketoacidosis were more likely to be hospitalized. diabetic ketoacidosis was a presenting feature of <10% of youth with type 2. young and poor children are disproportionately affected.

preterm infants are at an increased risk for abnormalities of general movements, which predict subsequent poor neurodevelopmental outcome. the cerebral lesion that predisposes the preterm infant to abnormal general movements remains unknown. the objective of this study was to determine the association between mri-defined cerebral abnormalities and general movements at 1 and 3 months' corrected age in infants who were born very preterm. eighty-six preterm infants (<30 weeks' gestation) were prospectively recruited and underwent brain mri at term-equivalent age to investigate the relationship between qualitative white and gray matter pathology and abnormality of general movements. standardized videotaped recordings of general movements were obtained at 1 and 3 months postterm (+/-1 week) and scored without knowledge of the mri findings. at 1 month corrected age, general movements of a writhing character were classified as normal or abnormal (poor repertoire, cramped synchronized, or chaotic). at 3 months' corrected age, fidgety general movements were classified as present or absent. at 1 month, 53 (62%) infants had abnormal general movements, 46 of whom had poor repertoire general movements and 7 of whom had cramped synchronized general movements. at 3 months, 23 (25%) infants had absent fidgety movements. at both 1 and 3 months of age, consistently abnormal general movement classifications were related to increasing white matter abnormality on mri. in contrast, there were no significant relationships between general movement classifications and gray matter abnormalities, either individually or in total. the significant relationships between general movements at 1 and 3 months and cerebral white matter abnormalities on mri in the very preterm infant support the concept that abnormal general movements reflect white matter injury.

the purpose of this pilot study was to determine whether mixing a multinutrient fortifier to approximately one half of the human milk fed each day for a finite period after discharge improves the nutrient intake and growth of predominantly human milk-fed low birth weight infants. we also assessed the impact of this intervention on the exclusivity of human milk feeding. human milk-fed (> or = 80% feeding per day) low birth weight (750-1800 g) infants (n = 39) were randomly assigned at hospital discharge to either a control or an intervention group. infants in the control group were discharged from the hospital on unfortified human milk. nutrient enrichment of human milk in the intervention group was achieved by mixing approximately one half of the human milk provided each day with a powdered multinutrient human milk fortifier for 12 weeks after discharge. milk with added nutrients was estimated to contain approximately 80 kcal (336 kj) and 2.2 g protein/100 ml plus other nutrients. intensive lactation support was provided to both groups. infants in the intervention group were longer during the study period, and those born < or = 1250 g had larger head circumferences than infants in the control group. there was a trend toward infants in the intervention group to be heavier at the end of the intervention compared with those in the control group. mean protein, zinc, calcium, phosphorus, and vitamins a and d intakes were higher in the intervention group. results from this study suggest that adding a multinutrient fortifier to approximately one half of the milk provided to predominantly human milk-fed infants for 12 weeks after hospital discharge may be an effective strategy in addressing early discharge nutrient deficits and poor growth without unduly influencing human milk feeding when intensive lactation support is provided.

the goals were to examine the prevalence of adolescents having a television in their bedroom and to describe associated personal, social, and behavioral characteristics. participants included 781 adolescents (mean age: 17.2 years) who completed a mailed project eating among teens ii questionnaire. the relationships between adolescents having a television in their bedroom and sociodemographic, behavioral, and personal characteristics were examined. nearly two thirds (62%) of participants had a bedroom television. gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and age were associated with the presence of a bedroom television. compared with girls without a bedroom television, girls with a bedroom television reported less time spent in vigorous activity (1.8 vs 2.5 hours/week), more time spent watching television (20.7 vs 15.2 hours/week), lower vegetable intake (1.7 vs 2.0 servings per day), greater sweetened beverage consumption (1.2 vs 1.0 servings per day), and fewer family meals (2.9 vs 3.7 meals per week). compared with boys without a bedroom television, boys with a bedroom television reported more time spent watching television (22.2 vs 18.2 hours/week), lower fruit intake (1.7 vs 2.2 servings per day), fewer family meals (2.9 vs 3.6 meals per week), and lower grade point average (2.6 vs 2.9). twice as many youths with a television in their bedroom were heavy television users (watched >5 hours/day), compared with youths without a television in their bedroom (16% vs 8%). adolescents with a bedroom television reported more television viewing time, less physical activity, poorer dietary habits, fewer family meals, and poorer school performance. refraining from placing a television in teenagers' rooms may be a first step in helping to decrease screen time and subsequent poor behaviors associated with increased television watching.

type 2 diabetes is a growing problem among adolescents, but little is known about self-management behaviors in this population. our aim was to examine self-management behaviors and glycemic control among adolescents with type 2 diabetes. from 2003 to 2005, a telephone survey of adolescents with type 2 diabetes was performed. chart review obtained most recent glycated hemoglobin and clinical characteristics. analyses compared patient characteristics and self-management behaviors to recent glycated hemoglobin levels. of 139 patients contacted, 103 (74%) completed the study. the mean age was 15.4 years: 69% were girls, 47% were white, and 46% were black. mean glycated hemoglobin was 7.7%, and the average duration of diabetes was 2.0 years. more than 80% of patients reported > or = 75% medication compliance, and 59% monitored blood glucose > 2 times daily. however, patients reported frequent episodes of overeating, drinking sugary drinks, and eating fast food. more than 70% of patients reported exercising > or = 2 times a week, but 68% reported watching > or = 2 hours of television daily. nonwhite patients had higher glycated hemoglobin and hospitalizations per year compared with white patients. in multivariable analyses, nonwhite race remained significantly associated with higher glycated hemoglobin even after adjusting for age, gender, bmi, insurance status, and other factors. nonwhite patients were more likely to watch > or = 2 hours of television per day (78% vs 56%), to report exercising < or = 1 time per week (35% vs 21%), and to drink > or = 1 sugary drink daily (27% vs 13%). although patients reported good medication and monitoring adherence, they also reported poor diet and exercise habits and multiple barriers. nonwhite race was significantly associated with poorer glycemic control even after adjusting for covariates. this may, in part, be related to disparities in lifestyle behaviors. additional studies are indicated to further assess self-management behaviors and potential racial disparities in adolescents with type 2 diabetes.

the purpose of this study was to compare vaccination coverage among children 19 to 35 months of age with and without special health care needs overall and among demographic subgroups. data are from the national survey of children with special health care needs, a module of the state and local area integrated telephone survey, which was sponsored by the health resources and services administration maternal and child health bureau and conducted in 2000-2002 by the centers for disease control and prevention national center for health statistics. we used data from the national immunization survey and the national survey of children with special health care needs to examine immunization coverage rates for individual vaccines and an array of combined series vaccinations. the relationship between special needs and immunization status was analyzed by age, gender, and race or ethnicity of the child; the child's health insurance type; the mother's educational attainment and presence in the household; and household income relative to the federal poverty level. overall, there were no significant differences between children with and without special needs for any of the individual antigens or combined immunization series. some significant differences by special needs status were found within certain demographic subgroups. our results suggest that, generally children with special health care needs have immunization rates that are very similar to typically developing children. there is some evidence that children with special health care needs are at risk for underimmunization if they are non-hispanic white or live in an affluent household and are more likely to be immunized if they are hispanic, poor, publicly insured, or if their mothers did not complete high school. these findings may be due to outreach or support programs that target disadvantaged children. however, it is important to note that the majority of comparisons within demographic subgroups show no significant differences between children with special health care needs and children without special health care needs.

infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia often require intensive treatment after birth, have prolonged hospitalizations, and have other congenital anomalies. after discharge from the hospital, they may have long-term sequelae such as respiratory insufficiency, gastroesophageal reflux, poor growth, neurodevelopmental delay, behavior problems, hearing loss, hernia recurrence, and orthopedic deformities. structured follow-up for these patients facilitates early recognition and treatment of these complications. in this report, follow-up of infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia is outlined.

the objectives of this study were to (1) assess accuracy of hypoglycemia detection in children with type 1 diabetes and their parents, using personal digital assistant technology to collect glucose estimates and meter readings, (2) identify demographic, clinical, and psychological predictors of individual differences in accuracy, and (3) test whether poor hypoglycemia detection is a risk factor for severe hypoglycemia in children. sixty-one children aged 6 to 11 and their parents completed 70 trials, over 1 month, of a survey programmed on a personal digital assistant, which asked them to rate symptoms, estimate current blood glucose level, and then measure blood glucose level. for the subsequent 6 months, parents reported children's severe hypoglycemia episodes bimonthly. both parents and children showed poor ability to recognize high or low blood glucose levels, making clinically significant errors as frequently as clinically accurate estimates. parents failed to recognize >50% of readings <3 mmol/l (<55 mg/dl) and made potentially dangerous errors such as believing the blood glucose level was high when it was low 17% of the time. children were significantly more accurate at recognizing their hypoglycemia but still failed to detect >40% of episodes. higher depression scores for children related to lower accuracy. children who were less accurate at detecting hypoglycemia subsequently experienced more severe hypoglycemia. ability to recognize hypoglycemia is a significant problem for children with type 1 diabetes and their parents. for children, poor ability to detect low blood glucose levels may be a significant and underappreciated risk factor for severe hypoglycemia. more effort is needed to provide education and training designed to improve hypoglycemia detection in this population.

intimate partner violence has been linked to poor child health. a continuous relationship with a primary care pediatric provider can help to detect intimate partner violence and connect families with needed services. the objectives of this study were to determine the relationship between intimate partner violence and (1) maternal report of a regular site for well-child care, (2) maternal report of a primary pediatric provider, (3) well-child visits in the first year of life, (4) up-to-date immunizations at 2 years of age, (5) maternal report of medical neglect, and (6) maternal report of the pediatric provider-caregiver relationship. this retrospective cohort study evaluated data from 209 at-risk families participating in the evaluation of the healthy families alaska program. research staff interviewed mothers near the time of an index child's birth and again at the child's second birthday. medical charts were abstracted for information on well-child visits and immunizations. mothers who disclosed intimate partner violence at the initial interview (n = 62) were significantly less likely to report a regular site for well-child care or a primary pediatric provider. in multivariable models, children of mothers who disclosed intimate partner violence tended to be less likely to have the recommended 5 well-child visits within the first year of life and were significantly less likely to be fully immunized at 2 years of age. differences in medical neglect were not statistically significant. of mothers who reported a specific primary pediatric provider, those with intimate partner violence histories trusted this provider less and tended to rate less favorably pediatric provider-caregiver communication and the overall quality of the pediatric provider-caregiver relationship. future research should explore effective ways to link intimate partner violence-exposed children with a medical home and a primary pediatric provider and to improve relationships between pediatric providers and caregivers who face violence at home.

developmental delay has been reported to occur with optic nerve hypoplasia, a leading cause of pediatric blindness, but has not been systematically examined for its prevalence and correlation with associated pathologies of optic nerve hypoplasia. the purpose of this study was to determine the developmental outcomes of children with optic nerve hypoplasia and the correlation of development with neuroradiographic, endocrinologic, and ophthalmic findings. we conducted a prospective analysis of 73 subjects diagnosed with optic nerve hypoplasia at <36 months of age for developmental outcomes at 5 years of age. subjects underwent neuroradiographic imaging, endocrinologic testing and examination, and ophthalmologic examination; developmental outcomes were assessed by using the battelle developmental inventory. at 5 years of age, developmental delay was present in 71% of subjects with optic nerve hypoplasia. of patients with unilateral (18%) and bilateral optic nerve hypoplasia, 39% and 78%, respectively, experienced developmental delay. corpus callosum hypoplasia and hypothyroidism were significantly associated with poor outcome in all of the developmental domains and an increased risk of delay. absence of the septum pellucidum was not associated with adverse development. six subjects had neither a neuroradiographic nor an endocrinologic abnormality, and of those, 4 were developmentally delayed. these prospective data confirm the significant association of developmental delay with optic nerve hypoplasia and identify corpus callosum hypoplasia and hypothyroidism as strong correlates. a diagnosis of optic nerve hypoplasia warrants neuroradiographic and endocrinologic testing for risk factors of delay and developmental assessments for early intervention planning.

the goal was to determine the clinical utility of doppler echocardiography in predicting the presence and severity of pulmonary hypertension in patients with chronic lung disease who subsequently underwent cardiac catheterization. a retrospective review of data for all patients < 2 years of age with a diagnosis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, or lung hypoplasia who underwent echocardiography and subsequently underwent cardiac catheterization for evaluation of pulmonary hypertension was performed. the accuracy of echocardiography in diagnosing pulmonary hypertension, on the basis of estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure, was compared with the detection of pulmonary hypertension with the standard method of cardiac catheterization. thirty-one linked measurements for 25 children were analyzed. systolic pulmonary artery pressure could be estimated in 61% of studies, but there was poor correlation between echocardiography and cardiac catheterization measures of systolic pulmonary artery pressure in these infants. compared with cardiac catheterization measurements, echocardiographic estimates of systolic pulmonary artery pressure diagnosed correctly the presence or absence of pulmonary hypertension in 79% of the studies in which systolic pulmonary artery pressure was estimated but determined the severity of pulmonary hypertension (severe pulmonary hypertension was defined as pulmonary/systemic pressure ratio of > or = 0.67) correctly in only 47% of those studies. seven (58%) of 12 children without estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure demonstrated pulmonary hypertension during subsequent cardiac catheterization. in the absence of estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure, qualitative echocardiographic findings, either alone or in combination, had worse predictive value for the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. as used in clinical practice, echocardiography often identifies pulmonary hypertension in young children with chronic lung disease; however, estimates of systolic pulmonary artery pressure were not obtained consistently and were not reliable for determining the severity of pulmonary hypertension.

we sought to (1) confirm the discrepancy between parent-reported and youth-reported adolescent health in a nationally representative sample, (2) compare the predictors of parent-reported and adolescent self-reported health, and (3) determine whether the discrepancy between the 2 ratings differed by sociodemographic characteristics, particularly income. data were from the 2001-2002 national health and nutrition examination survey. a total of 1157 adolescents aged 12 to 15 years, representative of 16,227,827 us youth, were included. youth and their parents reported on the youth's health status along with other indicators of health and illness and sociodemographic characteristics. to examine predictors of self-rated and parent-rated adolescent health (excellent to poor), bivariate analyses were conducted, followed by multiple linear regression adjusted for relevant covariates. all of the analyses were stratified by income (standardized poverty income index: < or = 1 vs > 1). parents and youth differed in subjective judgments regarding the child's health, even when these differences were not supported by other health indicators (days of school missed because of illness or injury or days of poor mental or physical health). poor adolescents reported worse self-rated health than higher-income youth, and their parents did also. in income-stratified multiple regression models, higher-income adolescents' and their parents' ratings were predicted by indicators of physical health. in contrast, poor youth and parent ratings were better predicted by mental health care use. poor youth with a mental health visit in the last year reported better health, but their parents saw these mental health visits as an indication of poor health. the findings suggest that social class differences in subjective ratings of adolescents' health are related to the differential ways that youth and parents determine what constitutes health and are not simply a reflection of objective health status.

a patent ductus arteriosus is a risk factor for pulmonary hemorrhage; however, despite halving the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus, indomethacin prophylaxis did not reduce the rate of pulmonary hemorrhage in the trial of indomethacin prophylaxis in preterms. inclusion of mild bleeds after trauma to the upper airways may have masked a beneficial drug effect. using the trial of indomethacin prophylaxis in preterms database, we studied the effect of prophylactic indomethacin on the prevention of serious hemorrhages in extremely low birth weight infants. we also compared the 18-month outcomes of infants with and without a serious pulmonary bleed. pulmonary hemorrhage was classified as serious when it was treated with increased ventilator support, a higher concentration of oxygen, or transfusion of blood products. the cumulative risk for serious pulmonary hemorrhage was estimated for the first week of life and for the entire nicu stay. poor outcome at a corrected age of 18 months was death or survival with cerebral palsy, cognitive delay, blindness, and/or deafness. a total of 123 (10.2%) of 1202 infants developed a serious pulmonary hemorrhage. during week 1, prophylactic indomethacin reduced the risk for serious pulmonary hemorrhage by 35%; however, during the entire nicu stay, the risk for such hemorrhages was decreased by only 23%. a reduced risk for patent ductus arteriosus explained 80% of the beneficial effect of prophylactic indomethacin on serious pulmonary bleeds. the risks for death or for survival with neurosensory impairment were doubled after a serious pulmonary hemorrhage. extremely low birth weight infants with serious pulmonary hemorrhage have an increased risk for poor long-term outcome. prophylactic indomethacin reduces the rate of early serious pulmonary hemorrhage, mainly through its action on patent ductus arteriosus. prophylactic indomethacin is less effective in preventing serious pulmonary hemorrhages that occur after the first week of life.

our goals were (1) to determine the use of medications to treat gastroesophageal reflux in extremely low birth weight infants (birth weight of < 1000 g) at discharge; (2) to identify risk factors associated with the use of medications to treat gastroesophageal reflux at discharge; and (3) to assess the contribution of gastroesophageal reflux medication use at discharge to growth and development at corrected ages of 18 to 22 months. this retrospective cohort analysis included extremely low birth weight infants enrolled at national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network centers between 2002 and 2003 who survived to follow-up evaluations at corrected ages of 18 to 22 months. analyses were used to identify factors associated with discharge with antireflux medications and poor growth or neurodevelopmental impairment after discharge. a total of 1598 infants were included in the analyses; 24.8% were discharged from the hospital with medications to treat gastroesophageal reflux. a total of 19.3% of the 1287 infants discharged at postmenstrual age of < or = 42 weeks were discharged with antireflux medications. for those infants, center, lower gestational age, and race had significant effects on the use of antireflux medications at discharge. a total of 47.6% of the 311 infants discharged at postmenstrual age of > 42 weeks were discharged with antireflux medications. for those infants, no tested variables were associated with treatment with antireflux medications at discharge. use of antireflux medications at discharge was not associated with either poor growth or neurodevelopmental impairment at corrected ages of 18 to 22 months. use of antireflux medications at the time of discharge seems to be common for extremely low birth weight infants, especially those discharged at postmenstrual age of > 42 weeks, but does not seem to have effects on growth or development at the time of follow-up evaluations.

outcomes of in-hospital pediatric cardiopulmonary arrest are dismal. recent data suggest that the quality of basic and advanced life support delivered to adults is low and contributes to poor outcomes, but few data regarding pediatric events have been reported. the objectives of this study were to (1) measure the median elapsed time to initiate important resuscitation maneuvers in simulated pediatric medical emergencies (ie, "mock codes") and (2) identify the types and frequency of errors committed during pediatric mock codes. a prospective, observational study was conducted of 34 consecutive hospital-based mock codes. a mannequin or computerized simulator was used to enact unannounced, simulated crisis situations involving children with respiratory distress or insufficiency, respiratory arrest, hemodynamic instability, and/or cardiopulmonary arrest. assessment included time elapsed to initiation of specific resuscitation maneuvers and deviation from american heart association guidelines. among the 34 mock codes, the median time to assessment of airway and breathing was 1.3 minutes, to administration of oxygen was 2.0 minutes, to assessment of circulation was 4.0 minutes, to arrival of any physician was 3.0 minutes, and to arrival of first member of code team was 6.0 minutes. among cardiopulmonary arrest scenarios, elapsed time to initiation of compressions was 1.5 minutes and to request for defibrillator was 4.3 minutes. in 75% of mock codes, the team deviated from american heart association pediatric basic life support protocols, and in 100% of mock codes there was a communication error. alarming delays and deviations occur in the major components of pediatric resuscitation. future educational and organizational interventions should focus on improving the quality of care delivered during the first 5 minutes of resuscitation. simulation of pediatric crises can identify targets for educational intervention to improve pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation and, ideally, outcomes.

the objective of this study was to determine whether the quality of a medical home is associated with access to needed therapeutic and supportive services among children with special health care needs. data from the 2000-2001 national survey of children with special health care needs were used in the analysis. the primary group of interest was children who were 0 to 17 years of age and needed therapeutic (n = 15,793) or supportive (n = 23,376) services. for each characteristic of a quality medical home, the percentage of children who needed and received therapeutic and supportive services was generated. logistic regression was used to control for covariates while modeling the association between overall quality of a child's medical home and having unmet needs for therapeutic or supportive services. of all children identified as needing services, 16.2% had unmet therapeutic and 9.8% unmet supportive service needs. only 23.9% of the children who needed therapeutic and 32.5% of children who needed supportive services met the criteria of having a quality medical home. high-quality care within medical homes was associated with a decreased likelihood of having unmet needs for therapeutic and supportive services. each characteristic of a quality medical home was associated with unmet need, as were severity of the child's condition, family income of <200% of the federal poverty level, underinsurance, and maternal education beyond high school. among other factors, having a poor-quality medical home seems to be a barrier to receiving needed therapeutic or supportive services for children with special health care needs. efforts on the part of pediatricians to establish quality medical homes for all children could have the added benefit of facilitating access to needed therapeutic and supportive services and promoting the health and well-being of children with special health care needs and their families.

studies of growth and neurodevelopmental impairment in extremely low birth weight infants often exclude infants with major congenital anomalies; thus, there are few outcome data available on these infants. the purpose of this work was to compare growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes of extremely low birth weight infants with major anomalies to extremely low birth weight infants without these findings. it was hypothesized that infants with severe anomalies would have worse growth, neurodevelopmental, and survival outcomes. a retrospective cohort analysis was performed on 5920 extremely low birth weight infants surviving beyond 12 hours of life at 19 neonatal network centers between 1998 and 2001. infants with significant anomalies were more likely to die before 18 to 22 months' corrected age. a total of 3705 children underwent neurodevelopmental and anthropometric evaluation at 18 to 22 months' corrected age. statistical significance for unadjusted comparisons was determined by wilcoxon tests for continuous variables and chi2 or fisher's exact tests for categorical variables. regression models were used to compare the outcomes after adjusting for potential confounders. children with major congenital anomalies were more likely to have bayley mental development index scores of < or = 70, psychomotor development index scores of < or = 70, neurodevelopmental impairment, moderate-to-severe cerebral palsy, length in the < or = 10th percentile, head circumference in the < or = 10th percentile, more rehospitalizations, and higher rates of early intervention use at 18 to 22 months' corrected age. at 18 to 22 months' corrected age, extremely low birth weight infants born with major anomalies have nearly twice the risk for neurodevelopmental impairment, increased risk of poor growth, and > 3 times greater risk of rehospitalization when compared with extremely low birth weight infants without major anomalies. this information may be valuable for counseling parents regarding the outcomes of these infants and for the facilitation of appropriate support and intervention services.

we describe the use of pamidronate to control marked hypercalcemia in an extremely premature infant with neonatal hyperparathyroidism that resulted from an inactivating mutation (r220w) of the calcium-sensing receptor. despite improvement in bone mineralization and subsequent parathyroidectomy with normalization of the serum calcium level, the combination of chronic lung disease, osteomalacia, and poor thoracic cage growth ultimately proved fatal. pamidronate therapy seems to be safe in the short-term and effective in helping control hypercalcemia even in the very premature infant, allowing for planned surgical intervention when it becomes feasible.

factors predictive of future asthma must be identified among young inner-city children, who suffer disproportionately from asthma. we investigated whether current asthma control predicts future asthma-related health care use among inner-city preschool-aged children with asthma. a total of 150 inner-city preschool-aged children with asthma were followed prospectively for 6 months. at baseline, symptom frequency and reliever-medication use were assessed to classify children into national asthma education and prevention program-derived control categories. long-term controller-medication use was also assessed, as well as asthma-related health care use at baseline and at 3 and 6 months. the mean age was 4.4 years, 92% were black, and 39% reported long-term controller use. at baseline, 37% were classified as having mild-intermittent, 17% had mild-persistent, 21% had moderate-persistent, and 25% had severe-persistent asthma control. significant changes in asthma control were observed over time, including 46% of children originally categorized with mild-intermittent asthma who had worsened asthma control by 3 months. asthma control significantly predicted future health care use 3 months later but not 6 months later. multivariate analyses showed that, once control status was known, reported use of long-term controller medication added little additional predictive value. among inner-city preschool-aged children, significant fluctuations in asthma control occur as early as 3 months after assessment. poor control but not long-term controller-medication use is an independent predictor of future asthma-related health care use at 3 months but is not significantly predictive of 6-month outcomes. therefore, clinicians caring for inner-city children with asthma should consider reassessing asthma control at least every 3 months to identify those at highest future risk and to provide early interventions.

studies of very preterm infants have demonstrated impairments in multiple neurocognitive domains. we hypothesized that neuromotor and executive-function deficits may independently contribute to school failure. we studied children who were born at < or = 25 completed weeks' gestation in the united kingdom and ireland in 1995 at early school age. children underwent standardized cognitive and neuromotor assessments, including the kaufman assessment battery for children and nepsy, and a teacher-based assessment of academic achievement. of 308 surviving children, 241 (78%) were assessed at a median age of 6 years 4 months. compared with 160 term classmates, 180 extremely preterm children without cerebral palsy and attending mainstream school performed less well on 3 simple motor tasks: posting coins, heel walking, and 1-leg standing. they more frequently had non-right-hand preferences (28% vs 10%) and more associated/overflow movements during motor tasks. standardized scores for visuospatial and sensorimotor function performance differed from classmates by 1.6 and 1.1 sds of the classmates' scores, respectively. these differences attenuated but remained significant after controlling for overall cognitive scores. cognitive, visuospatial scores, and motor scores explained 54% of the variance in teachers' ratings of performance in the whole set; in the extremely preterm group, additional variance was explained by attention-executive tasks and gender. impairment of motor, visuospatial, and sensorimotor function, including planning, self-regulation, inhibition, and motor persistence, contributes excess morbidity over cognitive impairment in extremely preterm children and contributes independently to poor classroom performance at 6 years of age.

despite limited epidemiologic evidence, concern has been raised that breastfeeding and its duration may increase the risk of early childhood caries. the objective of this study was to assess the potential association of breastfeeding and other factors with the risk for early childhood caries among young children in the united states. data about oral health, infant feeding, and other child and family characteristics among children 2 to 5 years of age (n = 1576) were extracted from the 1999-2002 national health and nutrition examination survey. the association of breastfeeding and its duration, as well as other factors that previous research has found associated with early childhood caries, was examined in bivariate analyses and by multivariable logistic and poisson regression analyses. after adjusting for potential confounders significant in bivariate analyses, breastfeeding and its duration were not associated with the risk for early childhood caries. independent associations with increased risk for early childhood caries were older child age, poverty, being mexican american, a dental visit within the last year, and maternal prenatal smoking. poverty and being mexican american also were independently associated with severe early childhood caries, whereas characteristics that were independently associated with greater decayed and filled surfaces on primary teeth surfaces were poverty, a dental visit within the last year, 5 years of age, and maternal smoking. these data provide no evidence to suggest that breastfeeding or its duration are independent risk factors for early childhood caries, severe early childhood caries, or decayed and filled surfaces on primary teeth. in contrast, they identify poverty, mexican american ethnic status, and maternal smoking as independent risk factors for early childhood caries, which highlights the need to target poor and mexican american children and those whose mothers smoke for early preventive dental visits.

eating problems are a common cause of concern for the parents of toddlers, but few studies have examined the correlates of eating problems or the growth patterns associated with them in a large population-based sample. our goal was to examine the distribution of eating behaviors in a large representative sample of toddlers and their mothers' approach to feeding. in addition, we describe the prevalence of parentally perceived eating problems and how they relate to specific behaviors, food preferences, and growth in the child. we conducted a cross-sectional analysis of data from a united kingdom population-based birth cohort, the gateshead millennium baby study, which included 455 questionnaires completed by parents when their children were aged 30 months. eating was perceived to be a problem by 89 (20%) parents. eating a limited variety (79 [17%]) and preferring drinks to food (57 [13%]) were the most prevalent problem behaviors. thirty-seven children (8%) were described by parents as definitely "faddy" (picky), and these children liked fewer foods and had higher eating restriction scores than those described as not faddy. children who were described as having an eating problem gained less weight over the first 2 years; 11.1% had weight faltering compared with 3.5% in children not described as having an eating problem. being faddy was only weakly associated with poor growth, and simply eating a limited variety was unrelated to growth. high milk consumption was associated with lower appetite but not with poor growth. eating problems are common in toddlers and in the majority are associated with normal growth, although weight faltering is more common in such children. excessive milk-drinking may be a cause of low appetite at meal times.

the purpose of this work was to examine factors related to perceived impact of early intervention on children with disabilities and their families. a nationally representative sample of approximately 2100 parents completed a 40-minute telephone interview near their child's third birthday. structural equation modeling examined the relationships between 3 support variables (quality of child services, quality of family services, and family/community support) and 2 outcomes at 36 months (impact on child and impact on family) and determined whether these relationships were mediated by 2 perceptual variables (optimism and confidence in parenting) or moderated by 5 demographic variables (poverty, maternal education, ethnicity, age of initial individual family service plan, and health at 36 months). perceived impact of early intervention on both child and family were significantly related to each other. the quality of child services was related to impact on the child but not on the family. the quality of family services was related to both child and family impact. informal support was not related to perceived impact on children or families but was strongly related to confidence in parenting and optimism. neither optimism nor confidence in parenting mediated the relationships between services or supports and perceived impact. minority families and families of children with poor health reported lower quality of services, but these characteristics did not moderate the relationships between services and perceived impact on the child. however, both poverty status and minority status were associated with perceptions of impact on the family. findings reinforce the role of high-quality services in maximizing perceived impact. they also highlight the important role of informal support in promoting optimism and confidence in parenting. poverty status, minority status, and poor health of the child are salient factors in predicting lower perceived quality of and benefit from services.

preterm infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia often demonstrate sucking difficulties. the aim of this study was to determine whether the severity of bronchopulmonary dysplasia affects not only coordination among suck-swallow-respiration but also sucking endurance and performance itself. twenty very low birth weight infants were studied. infants with anomalies or intraventricular hemorrhage were excluded from the evaluation. subjects were divided into 3 groups: no bronchopulmonary dysplasia (7 infants), bronchopulmonary dysplasia without home oxygen therapy (7 infants), and bronchopulmonary dysplasia with home oxygen therapy (6 infants). in addition to sucking efficiency, pressure, frequency, duration, and duration of sucking burst, length of deglutition apnea, number of swallows per burst, and respiratory rate were also measured during bottle-feeding at 40 weeks' postmenstrual age. in addition, pco2 and oxygen saturation were measured at rest and during bottle-feeding. infants with severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia demonstrated not only the lowest sucking pressure and sucking frequency, shortest sucking burst duration, and lowest feeding efficiency but also the lowest frequency of swallows during the run and the longest deglutition apnea. the respiratory rate was highest, and the decrease in oxygen saturation was largest, in infants with severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia. feeding problems depend on the severity of bronchopulmonary dysplasia. infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia demonstrated not only poor feeding coordination but also poor feeding endurance and performance.

in light of the high rates of child and adolescent obesity, we examined the nutritional content of food advertising seen by american children and adolescents. we drew samples of top-rated television shows by using ratings data to examine the nutritional content for fat, saturated fat, sugar, sodium, and fiber of food-product advertisements seen on television by both children and adolescents. food products were examined in aggregate and by 5 separate categories that included cereal, sweets, snacks, drinks, and other food products. for 2- to 11-year-olds and 12- to 17-year-olds, respectively, a sample of 50,351 and 47,955 30-second-equivalent food-product advertisements and their related nutritional content were weighted by television ratings data to provide actual exposure measures of the nutritional content of food advertising seen by children and adolescents. study results showed that 97.8% and 89.4% of food-product advertisements viewed by children 2 to 11 years old and adolescents 12 to 17 years old, respectively, were high in fat, sugar, or sodium. on average, 46.1% and 49.1% of total calories among the products advertised came from sugar in the advertisements seen by these respective age groups. a total of 97.6% of cereal advertisements seen by children 2 to 11 years old were for high-sugar cereals. no substantial differences were found in the nutritional content of advertisements seen by black and white children 2 to 11 years old. however, a slightly higher proportion of food advertisements in general and across all food-product categories seen by black versus white adolescents were for high-sugar products. the overwhelming majority of food-product advertisements seen on television by american children and adolescents are of poor nutritional content.

a low mean birth weight is a constant finding in pregnancies of women with homozygous sickle cell disease. the factors responsible are largely unknown and have now been investigated in an 11-year retrospective analysis. records for 126 pregnancies of mothers with homozygous sickle cell disease and 126 pregnancies of control women with an aa phenotype, matched according to age and date of delivery, were examined. events during pregnancy and outcomes of pregnancy were recorded. pregnancy outcomes for mothers with homozygous sickle cell disease confirmed the lower birth weight, gestational age, and placental weight. a low birth weight in infants of mothers with homozygous sickle cell disease was strongly related to gestational age and placental weight and weakly related to reticulocyte counts and a history of preeclampsia in univariate analyses, but only gestational age and placental weight remained significant in multivariate analyses. no relationships were seen with maternal age, parity, anthropometric features, other hematologic features (hemoglobin levels, fetal hemoglobin levels, mean cell volume, and alpha-thalassemia), pregnancy-induced hypertension, or prepartum hospital admissions (expressed as number or total days). compared with jamaican standards, birth weight was affected more than head circumference or length in infants of mothers with homozygous sickle cell disease, indicating asymmetric growth retardation, which occurred for 27% of boys and 38% of girls (compared with 4% and 9%, respectively, among infants of control mothers). a chronic condition such as homozygous sickle cell disease might have been expected to cause symmetric growth retardation throughout pregnancy. the finding of asymmetric retardation might indicate adverse factors emerging late in pregnancy and might have relevance for the poor pregnancy outcomes in such mothers.

to gain new insights into the influence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia on the immature brain and to detect abnormalities, we studied the functional integrity of the brainstem in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia. forty-one very preterm infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia were studied at postconceptional ages of 37 to 42 weeks. brainstem auditory evoked responses were recorded and analyzed by using the maximal length sequence technique. compared with term control subjects, wave v latency in the maximal length sequence brainstem auditory evoked response of the infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia increased significantly at all 91 to 910 clicks per second rates. similarly, i-v and particularly iii-v interpeak intervals increased significantly. the iii-v/i-iii interval ratio also increased significantly at all click rates. all of these abnormalities became more significant as the click rate was increased. compared with healthy, very preterm control subjects, all of these maximal length sequence brainstem auditory evoked response variables increased significantly at all click rates, although the differences between the 2 groups were slightly smaller than those between the infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia and the term control subjects. the wave i and iii latencies and i-iii interval in the infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia did not show any abnormalities. the slopes of the wave v latency-rate function and i-v and particularly iii-v interval-rate functions for the infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia were significantly steeper than those for both term and healthy, very preterm control subjects. the slope of the iii-v/i-iii interval ratio-rate function for the infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia was also significantly steeper than those for the 2 control groups. the results suggest poor myelination and synaptic function of the brainstem in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, resulting in impaired functional integrity. in comparison, peripheral neural function was relatively intact.

this study evaluated seizure, patient characteristics, and neurodevelopmental outcome of term newborns with amplitude-integrated electroencephalography-detected status epilepticus. fifty-six term infants with status epilepticus were identified during a 12.5-year period. the time of onset of status epilepticus, background pattern before and after status epilepticus, success of controlling status epilepticus with antiepileptic drugs, and neurodevelopmental outcome were studied. the incidence of status epilepticus in our population was 18%. forty-two infants (75%) had a poor outcome and 14 were normal at follow-up. when all infants were studied as a single group, we found that not the duration, but the background pattern was correlated with neurodevelopmental outcome. in 50% of the infants with a poor outcome, the background pattern was abnormal before the status epilepticus and in 71% after the status epilepticus. among infants with a good outcome, background pattern was normal in 14% before and 7% after the status epilepticus. in a subgroup of 48 infants with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, there was a significant difference in background pattern, as well as in duration of the status epilepticus between infants with a poor outcome, compared with those with a good outcome. in 48% of the infants with a poor outcome, the background pattern was abnormal before, and in 75% after the status epilepticus, compared with 25% and 13%, respectively, for those with a good outcome. in 57% of the infants with a hemorrhage or perinatal arterial stroke, the status epilepticus was not controlled with antiepileptic drugs, compared with 21% in infants with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (not significant). the background pattern at the onset of status epilepticus was the main predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome. the duration of the status epilepticus was only of predictive value in the infants with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. no association was found between the ability to control status epilepticus and subsequent neurodevelopmental outcome.

we sought to examine the impact of a randomized, controlled trial of home visiting among infants with failure to thrive on growth, academic/cognitive performance, and home/classroom behavior at age 8. infants with failure to thrive (n = 130) or adequate growth (n = 119) were recruited from pediatric primary care clinics serving low-income, urban communities. eligibility criteria included age <25 months, gestational age >36 weeks, birth weight >2500 g, and no significant medical conditions. evaluation included anthropometries, bayley scales, maternal anthropometries, demographics, negative affect, iq, and the home observation for measurement of the environment scale. infants with failure to thrive were treated in an interdisciplinary growth and nutrition clinic and randomized into clinical-intervention-plus-home-intervention or clinical-care-only groups. the home-visiting curriculum promoted maternal sensitivity, parent-infant relationships, and child development. follow-up visits were conducted by evaluators who were unaware of the children's growth or intervention history. at age 8, the evaluation included anthropometries, the wechsler intelligence scale for children iii, and the wide range achievement test, revised. mothers completed the child behavior checklist and teachers completed the teacher report form. multivariate analyses of variance were used to examine differences in growth, cognitive/academic performance, and home/school behavior, adjusted by maternal education, public assistance, and, when appropriate, infant bayley score, maternal bmi, height, negative affect, iq, and home observation for measurement of the environment scores. retention was 74% to 78%. children in the adequate-growth group were significantly taller, heavier, and had better arithmetic scores than the clinical-intervention-only group, with the clinical-intervention-plus-home-intervention group intermediate. there were no group differences in iq, reading, or mother-reported behavior problems. children in the clinical-intervention-plus-home-intervention group had fewer teacher-reported internalizing problems and better work habits than the clinical-intervention-only group. early failure to thrive increased children's vulnerability to short stature, poor arithmetic performance, and poor work habits. home visiting attenuated some of the negative effects of early failure to thrive, possibly by promoting maternal sensitivity and helping children build strong work habits that enabled them to benefit from school. findings provide evidence for early intervention programs for vulnerable infants.

decisions regarding end-of-life care in critically ill newborns in the netherlands have received considerable criticism from the media and from the public. this might be because of a lack of proper information and knowledge. our purpose was to provide detailed information about how and when the implementation of end-of-life decisions, which are based on quality-of-life considerations, takes place. we reviewed the charts of all infants who died within the first 2 months of life at 2 university hospitals in the netherlands from january to july 2005 and extracted all relevant information about the end-of-life decisions. we interviewed the responsible neonatologists about the end-of-life decisions and the underlying quality-of-life considerations and about the process of implementation. of a total of 30 deaths, 28 were attributable to withholding or withdrawing life-sustaining treatment. in 18 of 28 cases, the infant had no chance to survive; in 10 cases, the final decision was based on the poor prognosis of the infant. in 6 patients, 2 successive different end-of-life decisions were made. the arguments that most frequently were used to conclude that quality of life was deemed poor were predicted suffering and predicted inability of verbal and nonverbal communication. implementation consisted of discontinuation of ventilatory support and alleviation of pain and symptoms. neuromuscular blockers were added shortly before death in 5 cases to prevent gasping, mostly on parental request. the majority of deaths were attributable to withholding or withdrawing treatment. in most cases, the newborn had no chance to survive and prolonging of treatment could not be justified. in the remaining cases, withholding or withdrawing treatment was based on quality-of-life considerations, mostly the predicted suffering and predicted inability of verbal and nonverbal communication. potentially life-shortening medication played a minor role as a cause of death.

this was a systematic evidence review for the us preventive services task force, intended to synthesize the published evidence regarding the effectiveness of selecting, testing, and managing children and adolescents with dyslipidemia in the course of routine primary care. literature searches were performed to identify published articles that addressed 10 key questions. the review focused on screening relevant to primary care of children without previously identified dyslipidemias, but included treatment trials of children with dyslipidemia because some drugs have only been tested in that population. normal values for lipids for children and adolescents are defined according to population levels (percentiles). age, gender, and racial differences and temporal trends may alter these statistical cut points. approximately 40% to 55% of children with elevated total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein levels will continue to have elevated lipid levels on follow-up. current screening recommendations based on family history will fail to detect substantial numbers (30%-60%) of children with elevated lipid levels. drug treatment for dyslipidemia in children has been studied and shown to be effective only for suspected or proven familial monogenic dyslipidemias. intensive dietary counseling and follow-up can result in improvements in lipid levels, but these results have not been sustained after the cessation of the intervention. the few trials of exercise are of fair-to-poor quality and show little or no improvements in lipid levels for children without monogenic dyslipidemias. although reported adverse effects were not serious, studies were generally small and not of sufficient duration to determine long-term effects of either short or extended use. several key issues about screening and treatment of dyslipidemia in children and adolescents could not be addressed because of lack of studies, including effectiveness of screening on adult coronary heart disease or lipid outcomes, optimal ages and intervals for screening children, or effects of treatment of childhood lipid levels on adult coronary heart disease outcomes.

the condition widely known as munchausen syndrome by proxy comprises both physical abuse and medical neglect and is also a form of psychological maltreatment. although it is a relatively rare form of child abuse, pediatricians need to have a high index of suspicion when faced with seemingly inexplicable findings or treatment failures. the fabrication of a pediatric illness is a form of child abuse and not merely a mental health disorder, and there is a possibility of an extremely poor prognosis if the child is left in the home. in this statement, factors are identified that may help the physician recognize this insidious type of child abuse that occurs in a medical setting, and recommendations are provided for physicians regarding when to report a case to their state's child protective service agency.

infant sleep problems are strongly associated with poorer maternal mental health. it is not known whether they are also associated with poorer paternal mental health, nor whether sleep problems in older children are associated with maternal or paternal mental health. we aimed to examine relationships between child sleep problems and maternal and paternal mental health and general well-being in each of the infant and preschool-aged groups. participants of this cross-sectional survey included families of infants (n = 5107) and preschool-aged children (n = 4983) participating in the first wave of the nationally representative longitudinal study of australian children, surveyed march through november 2004. the primary outcomes were mother and father serious psychological distress (measured by the kessler-6) and general health (parent report of general health taken from the 12-item short form health survey and dichotomized into poor versus good health). a primary caregiver's report of the child's sleep problem was dichotomized into moderate/severe versus none/mild. the prevalence of severe psychological distress ranged from 3% to 5%, and prevalence of poor general health ranged from 8% to 11%. moderate to severe sleep problems affected 17% of infants and 14% of preschool-aged children. infant sleep problems were associated with poor general health in mothers and with poor general health in fathers. preschool sleep problems were associated with poor maternal general health. in mothers with no past history of depression, infant sleep problems had a greater effect on severe psychological distress compared with mothers with a past history of depression. sleep problems are common in infants and preschool-aged children. infant sleep problems, in particular, are associated with poorer health in both parents, especially the mental health of mothers with no past history of depression.

studies suggest that having a child with autism has a negative impact on maternal psychological functioning, but no large-scale, population-based studies are available. the objectives of this study were to (1) describe the psychological functioning, physical and mental health, family communication, and parenting support of mothers of a child with autism compared with other mothers on a population basis and (2) assess the independent relationship between having a child with autism and these outcomes, controlling for the child's social skills and demographic background. mothers of 61,772 children who were 4 to 17 years of age were surveyed by the national survey of children's health, 2003. autism was measured from an affirmative maternal response to the question, "has a doctor or health professional ever told you your child has autism?" there were 364 children with autism in the sample. mothers of a child with autism were highly stressed and more likely to report poor or fair mental health than mothers in the general population, even after adjustment for the child's social skills and demographic background. however, mothers of a child with autism were more likely to report a close relationship and better coping with parenting tasks and less likely to report being angry with their child after adjustment for the child's social skills and demographic background. having a child with autism was not associated with lower social support for parenting, an altered manner in which serious disagreements were discussed in the household, or increased violence in the household. mothers of children with autism showed remarkable strengths in the parent-child relationship, social support, and stability of the household in the context of high stress and poorer mental health.

the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy for hiv led to significant declines in hiv-associated morbidity and mortality in children. nonadherence to antiretroviral therapy is the leading cause of treatment failure in hiv-infected patients. the ability to recognize nonadherence is suboptimal, and differentiating it from other causes of inadequate viral suppression may be difficult. the purpose of this work was to examine the efficacy of hospital-based directly observed therapy in assessing adherence to antiretroviral medications in hiv-infected children and adolescents suspected of nonadherence and failing other interventions. the medical charts of all hiv-infected patients admitted to the university of chicago comer children's hospital for directly observed therapy from july 2004 to june 2006 were reviewed. patients were hospitalized for 7 days. data collected included demographics, clinical and immune class category, previous and current antiretroviral medications, viral resistance tests, hiv-1 rna viral load, and cd4+ t-cell number and percentage before and after directly observed therapy. there were 9 perinatally infected patients with a total of 13 admissions. the median age was 13 years, and 8 had been treated with multiple antiretroviral regimens. three common patterns of changes in the viral load over time were observed. in the first, the viral load dropped at the end of the directly observed therapy period and stayed low thereafter. in the second, the drop in the viral load seen at the end of the period was not sustained. in the third, there was no change in the viral load during or after the directly observed therapy period. compared with the viral load at admission, the viral load at the end of directly observed therapy was lower in 8 patients with a mean +/- sd decrease of 0.8 +/- 0.55 log10 copies per ml. short, hospital-based directly observed therapy was helpful in confirming nonadherence to antiretroviral medications, therefore impacting future therapeutic decisions in hiv-infected children and adolescents. short, hospital-based directly observed therapy should be considered in patients with poor virological control for whom outpatient interventions have failed.

preventive dental care is a cornerstone of optimal oral health. however, in 1996, only 38% of us children received preventive dental care. we used the national survey of children's health to (1) describe the proportion of us children with > or = 1 preventive dental visit within the previous year, (2) identify factors that were associated with preventive dental care use, and (3) test the hypothesis that preventive dental care use by near-poor children is associated with state child health insurance program policies for covering dental care. the national survey of children's health includes data from 102,353 children, weighted to represent 72.7 million children, nationally. our outcome of interest was > or = 1 preventive dental visit in the past year. we conducted multivariate regression analysis to identify factors that were associated significantly with this outcome using stata survey capabilities. in 2003, 72% of us children had a reported preventive dental care visit in the previous year. on multivariable analysis, we found that being young, black or multiracial relative to white, lower income, and lacking a personal doctor were variables with a significantly lower likelihood of a preventive dental visit. children in states with state child health insurance program dental coverage and broadest income eligibility had a 24% higher likelihood of a preventive dental visit when compared with children in states with limited or no state child health insurance program coverage for dental services, on adjusted analysis. although the proportion of us children with a preventive dental visit now is higher than previously reported, children who are at highest risk for dental problems still are those who are least likely to receive preventive dental care. when states cover preventive dental care at income eligibility levels > or = 200% of the federal poverty level, there is a greater likelihood that near-poor children will receive preventive dental care.

advances in medical technology have led to dilemmas in initiation and withdrawal of intensive care of newborn infants with a very poor prognosis. physicians and parents together must make difficult decisions guided by their understanding of the child's best interest. the foundation for these decisions consists of several key elements: (1) direct and open communication between the health care team and the parents of the child with regard to the medical status, prognosis, and treatment options; (2) inclusion of the parents as active participants in the decision process; (3) continuation of comfort care even when intensive care is not being provided; and (4) treatment decisions that are guided primarily by the best interest of the child.

the problems children have upon entering foster care can potentially explain prior research findings that frequent placement changes are associated with poor outcomes. this study sought to disentangle this cascading relationship in order to identify the independent impact of placement stability on behavioral outcomes downstream. placement stability over the first 18 months in out-of-home care for 729 children from the national survey of child and adolescent well-being was categorized as early stability (stable placement within 45 days), late stability (stable placement beyond 45 days), or unstable (never achieving stability). propensity scores predicting placement instability based on baseline attributes were divided into risk categories and added to a logistic regression model to examine the independent association between placement stability and behavioral well-being using the child behavior checklist and temperament scores from the national longitudinal survey of youth. half (52%) of the children achieved early stability, 19% achieved later stability, and 28% remained unstable. early stabilizers were more likely to be young, have normal baseline behavior, have no prior history with child welfare, and have birth parents without mental health problems. after accounting for baseline attributes, stability remained an important predictor of well-being at 18 months. unstable children were more likely to have behavior problems than children who achieved early stability across every level of risk for instability. among low-risk children, the probability of behavioral problems among early stabilizers was 22%, compared to 36% among unstable children, showing a 63% increase in behavior problems due to instability alone. children in foster care experience placement instability unrelated to their baseline problems, and this instability has a significant impact on their behavioral well-being. this finding would support the development of interventions that promote placement stability as a means to improve outcomes among youth entering care.

we tested the hypotheses that apolipoprotein e genotype, in particular carriage of the epsilon4 allele, is more likely to be associated with cerebral palsy and that children with more severe neurologic impairment are more likely to carry this allele. in this cross-sectional study, 209 children with cerebral palsy were matched with healthy control subjects according to gender and race. diagnosis of cerebral palsy was confirmed through physician consultation, medical chart review, and parent interview. apolipoprotein e genotyping was performed with dna obtained with buccal swabs. severity of motor impairment was rated by physical therapists, and occipitofrontal circumference was measured. compared with gender- and race-matched control subjects, overall risk for cerebral palsy was elevated 3.4-fold among children carrying an epsilon4 allele and was particularly elevated for children with quadriplegia/triplegia. this finding was independent of birth weight. carriage of the epsilon4 allele was also associated with increased severity of cerebral palsy and with a trend toward increased likelihood for microcephaly. moreover, children carrying an epsilon2 allele were at greater risk for cerebral palsy. these data implicate the apolipoprotein e epsilon4 and epsilon2 genotypes as susceptibility factors in determining neurologic outcomes after perinatal brain injury. additional studies are warranted to establish the role of apolipoprotein e in specific pathogenetic pathways leading to cerebral palsy or poor neurologic outcomes after perinatal brain injury.

the purpose of this study was to review the experience with herpes simplex encephalitis at the hospital for sick children over the past 12 years. all patients who were admitted to our institution with acute encephalitis between january 1994 and december 2005 were enrolled prospectively in an encephalitis registry. children from the registry with herpes simplex encephalitis were included in this study; we detailed the clinical presentations, laboratory findings, electroencephalographic findings, diagnostic imaging findings, treatments, and outcomes for all cases. of 322 cases of acute encephalitis, 5% were caused by herpes simplex virus. initially negative herpes simplex virus cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain reaction results were found in 2 cases (13%), but results became positive in repeat cerebrospinal fluid analyses. classic clinical presentations were seen in 75% of cases, cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis was found in 94%, elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein levels were found in 50%, electroencephalographic changes were observed in 94%, and diagnostic imaging abnormalities were noted in 88%. all patients were treated with intravenous acyclovir. neurologic sequelae occurred in 63% of cases, including seizures in 44% and developmental delays in 25%. there were no deaths in this study group. herpes simplex encephalitis continues to be associated with poor long-term neurologic outcomes despite appropriate therapy. cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain reaction results may be negative early in the course of herpes simplex encephalitis; therefore, repeat cerebrospinal fluid analysis should be considered if herpes simplex encephalitis is suspected. atypical forms of herpes simplex virus central nervous system disease may occur in children.

in this study we identified child and family-level characteristics that were associated with medication treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using nationally representative survey data. national survey of children's health data from 79264 youth 4 to 17 years of age were used. data were weighted to adjust for the complex survey design of the national survey of children's health. gender-specific logistic regression models were generated to identify child and family-level characteristics that were collectively associated with current medication status among youth with a reported diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. nationally, 7.8% of youth aged 4 to 17 years had a reported attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder diagnosis, and 4.3% had both a disorder diagnosis and were currently taking medication for the disorder. current medication treatment among youth with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder was associated with white race, younger age, english spoken in the home, health care coverage, a health care contact within the last year, and reported psychological difficulties. gender-specific logistic regression models revealed that, together, younger age, higher income, health care coverage, having psychological difficulties, and a health care contact in the past year were associated with medication use among boys with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. among girls with the disorder, younger age, psychological difficulties, fair-to-poor paternal mental health status, and a health care contact within the last year were collectively associated with current medication use. conclusions. regardless of gender, younger age, the presence of psychological difficulties, and a recent health care contact were significantly associated with medication treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. however, additional health care access and income variables among boys and paternal mental health status among girls represented gender-specific factors that were also associated with medication treatment for the disorder. future studies should characterize how and when the burden associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder leads to treatment, support, or services for this prevalent and impairing neurobehavioral disorder.

our goal was to identify characteristics associated with inadequate sleep for a national random sample of elementary school-aged children (6-11 years) and adolescents (12-17 years). data from 68418 participants in the 2003 national survey of children's health were analyzed by using weighted bivariate and multivariate regression models. the dependent variable was report of not getting enough sleep for a child of his or her age >or=1 night of the past week. independent variables included demographic characteristics, child health, school and other activities, and family life. parents of elementary school-aged children with inadequate sleep were more likely to report that their child was having problems at school or had a father with fair or poor health. parents of adolescents with inadequate sleep were more likely to report that their child had an atopic condition, frequent or severe headaches, a parent with less-than-excellent emotional health, or experienced frequent parental anger. inadequate sleep in both age groups was associated with parental report that their child usually or always displayed depressive symptomatology, family disagreements involved heated arguing, or parental concern that the child was not always safe at home, at school, or in their neighborhood. approximately 15 million american children are affected by inadequate sleep. primary care providers should routinely identify and address inadequate sleep and its associated health, school, and family factors.

underage drinking contributes to the 3 leading causes of death (unintentional injury, homicide, and suicide) among persons aged 12 to 20 years. most adverse health effects from underage drinking stem from acute intoxication resulting from binge drinking. although binge drinking, typically defined as consuming > or = 5 drinks on an occasion, is a common pattern of alcohol consumption among youth, few population-based studies have focused specifically on the characteristics of underage binge drinkers and their associated health risk behaviors. we analyzed data on current drinking, binge drinking, and other health risk behaviors from the 2003 national youth risk behavior survey. prevalence estimates and 95% confidence intervals were calculated by using sas and sudaan statistical software. logistic regression was used to examine the associations between different patterns of alcohol consumption and health risk behaviors. overall, 44.9% of high school students reported drinking alcohol during the past 30 days (28.8% binge drank and 16.1% drank alcohol but did not binge drink). although girls reported more current drinking with no binge drinking, binge-drinking rates were similar among boys and girls. binge-drinking rates increased with age and school grade. students who binge drank were more likely than both nondrinkers and current drinkers who did not binge to report poor school performance and involvement in other health risk behaviors such as riding with a driver who had been drinking, being currently sexually active, smoking cigarettes or cigars, being a victim of dating violence, attempting suicide, and using illicit drugs. a strong dose-response relationship was found between the frequency of binge drinking and the prevalence of other health risk behaviors. binge drinking is the most common pattern of alcohol consumption among high school youth who drink alcohol and is strongly associated with a wide range of other health risk behaviors. effective intervention strategies (eg, enforcement of the minimum legal drinking age, screening and brief intervention, and increasing alcohol taxes) should be implemented to prevent underage alcohol consumption and adverse health and social consequences resulting from this behavior.

young children exposed to tuberculosis have a high risk of progression to severe tuberculosis disease, but diagnosis of recent infection is hindered by the poor sensitivity of the tuberculin skin test. whether new blood tests can detect latent infection in this vulnerable group is unknown because there is no gold standard. we monitored a tuberculin skin test-negative infant whose mother had infectious multidrug-resistant tuberculosis with enzyme-linked immunospot, a blood test that enumerates mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific t cells. the enzyme-linked immunospot test became persistently positive by 6 months, and 18 months later the child developed active tuberculosis despite appropriate chemoprophylaxis. at this point, the magnitude of the enzyme-linked immunospot response increased >10-fold. our findings demonstrate that this blood test detected latent infection with dormant, yet viable, bacilli and illustrate how enzyme-linked immunospot could improve diagnosis of childhood tuberculosis infection.

advertising is a pervasive influence on children and adolescents. young people view more than 40,000 ads per year on television alone and increasingly are being exposed to advertising on the internet, in magazines, and in schools. this exposure may contribute significantly to childhood and adolescent obesity, poor nutrition, and cigarette and alcohol use. media education has been shown to be effective in mitigating some of the negative effects of advertising on children and adolescents.

accurate and early diagnosis of the fetal alcohol syndrome is important for secondary prevention, intervention, and treatment, yet many pediatricians lack expertise in recognition of the characteristic features of this disorder. after a structured training program for pediatricians, we examined the ability to accurately diagnose fetal alcohol syndrome. two dysmorphologists conducted a 2-day training program in the diagnosis of the physical features of fetal alcohol syndrome for 4 pediatricians in moscow. dysmorphologists and pediatricians worked in teams to examine children, demonstrate techniques, and validate that pediatricians could identify physical features of this disorder under direct observation. subsequently, pediatricians independently evaluated children in 41 boarding schools and orphanages. those children diagnosed with fetal alcohol syndrome or deferred (possible fetal alcohol syndrome) by the pediatricians were then evaluated by the dysmorphologists. accuracy of the diagnosis of fetal alcohol syndrome or deferred was assessed, as well as the interrater agreement for specific selected features of the disorder. a total of 110 children were examined by both the pediatricians and the dysmorphologists. of these, 79 were identified with fetal alcohol syndrome by the pediatricians; in 66 (83.5%) of these children, the diagnosis was confirmed by the dysmorphologists. among 31 children who were classified as deferred by the pediatricians, 21 (67.7%) were confirmed with either fetal alcohol syndrome or deferred by the dysmorphologists. with respect to selected structural features characteristic of fetal alcohol syndrome, good interrater agreement was noted for height and head circumference < or = 10th centile, whereas moderate-to-fair agreement was noted for smooth philtrum, long philtrum, presence of "hockey-stick" palmar crease, and palpebral fissure length < or = 10th centile. poor agreement was noted for thin upper lip. after a relatively short training session, pediatricians were reasonably accurate in diagnosing fetal alcohol syndrome on the basis of physical features and in recognizing most of the selected specific features associated with the disorder.

the goals were to identify predictor variables and to develop scoring systems and classification trees to predict death/disability or death in infants with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. secondary analysis of data from the multicenter, randomized, controlled, national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network trial of hypothermia in hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy was performed. data for 205 neonates diagnosed as having hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy were studied. logistic regression analysis was performed by using clinical and laboratory variables available within 6 hours of birth, with death or moderate/severe disability at 18 to 22 months or death as the outcomes. by using the identified variables and odds ratios, scoring systems to predict death/disability or death were developed, weighting each predictor in proportion to its odds ratio. in addition, classification and regression tree analysis was performed, with recursive partitioning and automatic selection of optimal cutoff points for variables. correct classification rates for the scoring systems, classification and regression tree models, and early neurologic examination were compared. correct classification rates were 78% for death/disability and 71% for death with the scoring systems, 80% and 77%, respectively, with the classification and regression tree models, and 67% and 73% with severe encephalopathy in early neurologic examination. correct classification rates were similar in the hypothermia and control groups. among neonates diagnosed as having hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, the classification and regression tree model, but not the scoring system, was superior to early neurologic examination in predicting death/disability. the 3 models were comparable in predicting death. only a few components of the early neurologic examination were associated with poor outcomes. these scoring systems and classification trees, if validated, may help in assessments of prognosis and may prove useful for risk-stratification of infants with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy for clinical trials.

using the 125-day baboon model of bronchopulmonary dysplasia treated with prenatal steroid and exogenous surfactant, we hypothesized that a delay of extubation from low tidal volume positive pressure ventilation to nasal continuous positive airway pressure at 5 days (delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group) would not induce more lung injury when compared with baboons aggressively weaned to nasal continuous positive airway pressure at 24 hours (early nasal continuous positive airway pressure group), because both received positive pressure ventilation. after delivery by cesarean section at 125 days (term: 185 days), infants received 2 doses of curosurf (chiesi farmaceutica s.p.a., parma, italy) and daily caffeine citrate. the delay in extubation to 5 days resulted in baboons in the delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group having a lower arterial to alveolar oxygen ratio, high paco2, and worse respiratory function. the animals in the delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group exhibited a poor respiratory drive that contributed to more reintubations and time on mechanical ventilation. a few animals in both groups developed necrotizing enterocolitis and/or sepsis, but infectious pneumonias were not documented. cellular bronchiolitis and peribronchiolar alveolar wall thickening were more frequently seen in the delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group. bronchoalveolar lavage levels of interleukin-6, interleukin-8, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha, and growth-regulated oncogene-alpha were significantly increased in the delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group. standard and digital morphometric analyses showed no significant differences in internal surface area and nodal measurements between the groups. platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule vascular staining was not significantly different between the 2 nasal continuous positive airway pressure groups. volutrauma and/or low-grade colonization of airways secondary to increased reintubations and ventilation times are speculated to play causative roles in the delayed nasal continuous positive airway pressure group findings.

children born extremely immature (gestational age < 26 weeks' gestation) increasingly reach school age. information on their overall functioning and special health care needs is necessary to plan for their medical and educational services. this study was undertaken to examine neurosensory, medical, and developmental conditions together with functional limitations and special health care needs of extremely immature children compared with control subjects born at term. we studied 11-year-old children born before 26 completed weeks of gestation in all of sweden from 1990 through 1992. all had been evaluated at 36 months' corrected age. identification of children with chronic conditions lasting > or = 12 months was based on a questionnaire administered to parents. neurosensory impairments were identified by reviewing health records. information regarding other specific medical diagnoses and developmental disabilities was obtained by standard parent and teacher questionnaires. of 89 eligible children, 86 (97%) were studied at a mean age of 11 years. an equal number of children born at term served as controls. logistic-regression analyses adjusting for social risk factors and gender showed that significantly more extremely immature children than controls had chronic conditions, including functional limitations (64% vs 11%, respectively), compensatory dependency needs (59% vs 25%), and services above those routinely required by children (67% vs 22%). specific diagnoses or disabilities with higher rates in extremely immature children than in controls included neurosensory impairment (15% vs 2%), asthma (20% vs 6%), poor motor skills of > 2 sds above the mean (26% vs 3%), poor visual perception of > 2 sds above the mean (21% vs 4%), poor learning skills of > 2 sds above the mean (27% vs 3%), poor adaptive functioning with t scores of < 40 (42% vs 9%), and poor academic performance with t score < 40 (49% vs 7%). children born extremely immature have significantly greater health problems and special health care needs at 11 years of age. however, few children have severe impairments that curtail major activities of daily living.

knowledge of long-term growth of extremely preterm infants in relation to gestational age is incomplete, and there are concerns regarding their poor growth in early childhood. as part of a longitudinal study of a national cohort of infants born at <26 weeks' gestation (extremely immature), growth development from birth to the age of 11 years was examined, and correlates of growth attainment were analyzed. two hundred forty-seven extremely immature children were born alive from april 1990 through march 1992 in the whole of sweden, and 89 (36%) survived. growth and neurosensory outcomes of all extremely immature survivors were evaluated at 36 months of age. eighty-six (97%) extremely immature children were identified and assessed at 11 years of age. in this growth study, 83 extremely immature infants (mean [sd]: birth weight, 772 g [110 g]; gestational age, 24.6 weeks [0.6 weeks]) without severe motor disability were followed up prospectively from birth to 11 years old and compared with a matched group of 83 children born at term. z scores for weight, height, head circumference, and bmi were computed for all children. we also examined gender-specific longitudinal growth measures. predictors of 11-year growth were studied by multivariate analyses. extremely immature children were significantly smaller in all 3 growth parameters than the controls at 11 years. extremely immature children showed a sharp decline in weight and height z scores up to 3 months' corrected age, followed by catch-up growth in both weight and height up to 11 years. in contrast to weight and height, extremely immature children did not exhibit catch-up growth in head circumference after the first 6 months of life. the mean bmi z scores increased significantly from 1 to 11 years in both groups. the mean bmi change between 1 and 11 years of age was significantly larger in extremely immature than in control participants. extremely immature girls showed a faster weight increase than extremely immature boys, whereas catch-up growth in height and head circumference was similar in these groups. multiple-regression analyses revealed that preterm birth and parental height were significant predictors of 11-year height, and group status (prematurity) correlated strongly with head circumference. children born at the limit of viability attain poor growth in early childhood, followed by catch-up growth to age 11 years, but remain smaller than their term-born peers. strategies that improve early growth might improve the outcome.

tuberculosis control programs place an almost exclusive emphasis on adults with sputum smear-positive tuberculosis, because they are most infectious. however, children contribute a significant proportion of the global tuberculosis caseload and experience considerable tuberculosis-related morbidity and mortality, but few children in endemic areas have access to antituberculosis treatment. the diagnostic difficulty experienced in endemic areas with limited resources has been identified as a major factor contributing to poor treatment access. in general, there is a sense of scepticism regarding the potential value of symptom-based diagnostic approaches, because current clinical diagnostic approaches are often poorly validated. the natural history of childhood tuberculosis demonstrates that symptoms may offer good diagnostic value if they are well defined and if appropriate risk stratification is applied. this study aimed to determine the value of well-defined symptoms to diagnose childhood pulmonary tuberculosis in a tuberculosis-endemic area. a prospective, community-based study was conducted in cape town, south africa. specific well-defined symptoms were documented in all children < 13 years of age reporting a persistent, nonremitting cough of > 2 weeks' duration; study participants were thoroughly evaluated for tuberculosis. in addition, all of the children who received antituberculosis treatment during the study period were reviewed by the investigator, irrespective of study inclusion. this concurrent disease surveillance provided a comprehensive overview of all of the childhood tuberculosis cases, allowing accurate assessment of the possible disadvantages associated with this symptom-based diagnostic approach. in the absence of an acceptable gold standard test, optimal case definition is an important consideration. children were categorized as "bacteriologically confirmed tuberculosis," "radiologically certain tuberculosis," "probable tuberculosis," or "not tuberculosis." bacteriologically confirmed tuberculosis was defined as the presence of acid-fast bacilli on sputum microscopy and/or mycobacterium tuberculosis cultured from a respiratory specimen. radiologically certain tuberculosis was defined as agreement between both independent experts that the chest radiograph indicated certain tuberculosis in the absence of bacteriologic confirmation. probable tuberculosis was defined as the presence of suggestive radiologic signs and good clinical response to antituberculosis treatment in the absence of bacteriologic confirmation or radiologic certainty. good clinical response was defined as complete symptom resolution and weight gain of > or = 10% of body weight at diagnosis, within 3 months of starting antituberculosis treatment. not tuberculosis was defined as spontaneous symptom resolution or no response to antituberculosis therapy in the absence of bacteriologic confirmation or radiologic signs suggestive of tuberculosis. pulmonary tuberculosis was defined as a symptomatic child with: (1) bacteriologically confirmed tuberculosis, (2) radiologically confirmed tuberculosis, or (3) probable tuberculosis (as defined), excluding isolated pleural effusion. in total, 1024 children were referred for evaluation. resolving symptoms were reported in 596 children (58.2%); 428 (41.8%) children with persistent, nonremitting symptoms at evaluation were investigated for tuberculosis. pulmonary tuberculosis was diagnosed in 197 children; 96 were categorized as bacteriologically confirmed tuberculosis, 75 as radiologically certain tuberculosis, and 26 as probable tuberculosis. combining a persistent nonremitting cough of > 2 weeks' duration, documented failure to thrive (in the preceding 3 months), and fatigue provided reasonable diagnostic accuracy in hiv-uninfected children (sensitivity: 62.6%; specificity: 89.8%; positive predictive value: 83.6%); the performance was better in the low-risk group (> or = 3 years; sensitivity: 82.3%; specificity: 90.2%; positive predictive value: 82.3%) than in the high-risk group (< 3 years; sensitivity: 51.8%; specificity: 92.5%; positive predictive value: 90.1%). in children with an uncertain diagnosis at presentation, clinical follow-up was a valuable diagnostic tool that further improved diagnostic accuracy, particularly in the low-risk group. symptom-based approaches offered little diagnostic value in hiv-infected children. three (15%) of the 20 hiv-infected children diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis failed to report symptoms of sufficient duration to warrant study inclusion, whereas 25% reported persistent, nonremitting symptoms in the absence of tuberculosis. in addition, the tuberculin skin test was positive in < 20% of hiv-infected children diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis. the combined presence of 3 well-defined symptoms at presentation (persistent, nonremitting cough of > 2 weeks' duration; objective weight loss [documented failure to thrive] during the preceding 3 months; and reported fatigue) provided good diagnostic accuracy in hiv-uninfected children > or = 3 years of age, with clinical follow-up providing additional value. the approach performed less well in children < 3 years. however, the presence of a persistent, nonremitting cough together with documented failure to thrive still provided a fairly accurate diagnosis (sensitivity: 68.3%; specificity: 80.1%; positive predictive value: 82.1%), illustrating the importance of regular weight monitoring in young children. clinical follow-up also offered additional diagnostic value, but caution is required, because very young children have an increased risk of rapid disease progression. the approach performed poorly in hiv-infected children. recent household contact with an adult index case seemed to provide more diagnostic value than a positive tuberculin skin test, but novel t-cell-based assays may offer the only real improvement in sensitivity to diagnose m. tuberculosis infection in hiv-infected children. the variable diagnostic value offered by this symptom-based diagnostic approach illustrates the importance of risk stratification, as demonstrated by the fact that 11 (91.7%) of 12 children with severe disease manifestations who failed to meet the entry criteria were < 3 years of age or hiv infected. particular emphasis should be placed on the provision of preventive chemotherapy after documented exposure and/or infection in these high-risk children. study limitations include the small number of hiv-infected children, but on the positive side, the large number of hiv-uninfected children permitted adequate evaluation in this important group. it is often forgotten that hiv-uninfected children constitute the majority of child tuberculosis cases, even in settings where hiv is endemic. this study demonstrates the importance of ascertaining a child's hiv status before symptom-based diagnosis is attempted. because children were recruited at both the clinic and hospital level, some selection bias may have been introduced; however, the only significant difference between the 2 groups was the proportion of hiv-infected children. pulmonary tuberculosis was diagnosed with different levels of certainty, but no significant differences were recorded between these groups. pulmonary tuberculosis can be diagnosed with a reasonable degree of accuracy in hiv-uninfected children using a simple symptom-based approach. this offers the exciting prospect of improving treatment access for children, particularly in resource-limited settings where current access to antituberculosis treatment is poor.

in this study, i examined the relative odds of achievement of preventive care goals during the first year of life and retention of medicaid coverage at the end of the first year among medicaid-enrolled low birth weight infants. association with maternal prenatal health promotion was also considered. i used a retrospective case-control design. low birth weight and normal birth weight infants in the florida medicaid program (1995-1999) matched on demographic factors were compared on their relative odds of achievement of preventive care goals and medicaid program retention using multivariate logistic regression (n = 7510). a subsample of infants with linked maternal claims was used to measure the association of maternal health promotion during the prenatal period. low birth weight infants had lower relative odds of achieving preventive care goals during the first year and of retaining medicaid coverage after the first year compared with infants of normal birth weight. however, when maternal health promotion during the prenatal care period was held constant, birth weight was no longer related to achievement of preventive care goals and program retention. maternal health promotion was positively associated with achievement of preventive goals and program retention for all infants regardless of birth weight. some medicaid-enrolled low birth weight infants are at risk for poor health supervision and poor continuity of care through failure to retain coverage. the disproportionate odds of poor health promotion among mothers of low birth weight infants explain much of this deficit. states may want to prioritize preventive care supervision and program reenrollment for children of mothers with evidence of low health promotion. this recommendation is particularly important for infants of low birth weight.

during the past 2 decades, family-centered care has evolved as the standard of care for children with special health care needs. a major principle of family-centered care is a strong partnership between the family and provider, working together to address issues and barriers to accessing comprehensive care and related services. the federal maternal and child health bureau defines a positive family-provider partnership as a core program outcome. our objective was to assess the extent to which families of children with special health care needs feel as though they are treated as partners in decision-making by their doctors. we analyzed the 2001 national survey of children with special health care needs, a nationally representative telephone survey of caretakers for 38,866 children with special health care needs. bivariate and multivariate statistical methods were used to assess the frequency of meeting the partnership core outcome, as well as the demographic and socioeconomic predictors of meeting core outcome. we also examined the effect of partnership on indicators of access and well-being for children with special health care needs. among children with special health care needs, 85.8% of families reported usually or always feeling like a partner in their child's care. however, living in poverty, minority racial and ethnic status, absence of health insurance, and depressed functional ability placed children with special health care needs and their families at elevated risk of being without a sense of partnership. we found that sense of partnership was associated with improved outcomes across a number of important health care measures, including missed school days, access to specialty care, satisfaction with care, and unmet needs for child and family services. results of the survey demonstrated that whereas most families of children with special health care needs feel they are partners in the care of their child, further work is needed, particularly for poor, uninsured, and minority children, as well as those with functional limitations. the survey results also demonstrate the importance of partnership; children whose care met the partnership core outcome experienced improved access to care and well-being.

evaluation procedures that rely solely on attending physician ratings may not identify residents who display poor communication skills or unprofessional behavior. inclusion of non-physician evaluators should capture a more complete account of resident competency. no published reports have examined the relationship between resident evaluations obtained from different sources in pediatric settings. the objective of this study was to determine whether parent and nurse ratings of specific resident behaviors significantly differ from those of attending physicians. thirty-six pediatric residents were evaluated by parents, nurses, and attending physicians during their first year of training. for analysis, the percentage of responses in the highest response category was calculated for each resident on each item. differences between attending physician ratings and those of parents and nurses were compared using the signed rank test. parent and attending physician ratings were similar on most items, but attending physicians indicated that they frequently were unable to observe the behaviors of interest. nurses rated residents lower than did attending physicians on items that related to respecting staff (69% vs 97%), accepting suggestions (56% vs 82%), teamwork (63% vs 88%), being sensitive and empathetic (62% vs 85%), respecting confidentiality (73% vs 97%), demonstrating integrity (75% vs 92%), and demonstrating accountability (67% vs 83%). nurse responses were higher than attending physicians on anticipating postdischarge needs (46% vs 25%) and effectively planning care (52% vs 33%). expanding resident evaluation procedures to include parents and nurses does enhance information that is gathered on resident communication skills and professionalism and may help to target specific behaviors for improvement. additional research is needed to determine whether receiving feedback on parent and nurse evaluations will have a positive impact on resident competency.

infantile hemangiomas are the most common tumor of infancy. risk factors for complications and need for treatment have not been studied previously in a large prospective study. this study aims to identify clinical characteristics associated with complications and the need for therapeutic intervention. we conducted a prospective cohort study at 7 us pediatric dermatology clinics with a consecutive sample of 1058 children, aged < or = 12 years, with infantile hemangiomas enrolled between september 2002 and october 2003. a standardized questionnaire was used to collect data on each patient and each hemangioma, including clinical characteristics, complications, and treatment. twenty-four percent of patients experienced complications related to their hemangioma(s), and 38% of our patients received some form of treatment during the study period. hemangiomas that had complications and required treatment were larger and more likely to be located on the face. segmental hemangiomas were 11 times more likely to experience complications and 8 times more likely to receive treatment than localized hemangiomas, even when controlled for size. large size, facial location, and/or segmental morphology are the most important predictors of poor short-term outcomes as measured by complication and treatment rates.

here we report a familial cluster of 3 cases of coxsackievirus b3 infection: a recent history of illness in a woman's 3-year-old son with a coxsackievirus b3-positive stool culture indicated that he probably infected his mother at home during her last week of pregnancy. consequently, she delivered an infected neonate who developed severe hepatitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and bilateral intracranial hemorrhage. the neonate remained well for the first 2 days of life. on the third day, he developed fever (39 degrees c) and poor peripheral circulation. on the fourth day, he developed petechiae and bruises over his chest wall and extremities, and prolonged bleeding was observed over venipuncture sites. investigations revealed severe thrombocytopenia (platelets: 41 x 10(9)/l) and a markedly deranged coagulation profile (prothrombin time: 19 seconds [reference: < 10 seconds]; activated partial thromboplastin time: > 120 seconds [reference: 24.2-37.0 seconds], serum d-dimers: 6722 ng/ml [reference: < 500 ng/ml]), suggestive of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. clinical examination revealed yellow sclera, hepatomegaly (5 cm), and splenomegaly (2 cm), consistent with hepatitis. serial chest radiographs showed bilateral pleural effusions, and an ultrasound of the abdomen demonstrated ascites. an echocardiogram showed normal cardiac structure and good contractility of both ventricles. however, a cranial ultrasound revealed bilateral grade 2 intraventricular hemorrhages. serum c-reactive protein increased to 33.9 mg/l. liver-function tests were also markedly deranged at this time, with maximum values for serum alanine transferase, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and ammonia concentration of 1354 iu/l, 258 micromol/l, 189 iu/l, and 147 micromol/l, respectively. serum glucose levels were normal. over the next 3 days, his fever subsided, and his liver function and clotting profile normalized by day 13 after onset of illness. a stool sample from the older brother, collected 14 days after his onset of illness at home, was positive for coxsackievirus b3 by both virus culture and enterovirus reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. he had neutralizing coxsackievirus b3 antibody titers of 1:2560 and 1:1280 on days 14 and 28 after his onset of illness, respectively. no virus was cultured from the mother's stool sample, collected 5 days after her onset of illness, but the enterovirus polymerase chain reaction was positive and maternal sera neutralized the coxsackievirus b3 isolated from the neonate. the maternal sera also showed a more than fourfold rise in antibody titer from 1:80 to 1:640 on days 5 and 16 after her onset of illness, respectively. neonatal antibody titers also showed a more than fourfold rise from < 1:80 to 1:2560 on days 1 and 21 after his onset of illness, respectively. this demonstrates that both the mother and the neonate had had recent coxsackievirus b3 infections. serially collected neonatal throat swab and stool samples were culture negative for enterovirus by 4 and 8 days after his onset of illness, respectively. however, enterovirus rna remained detectable by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction in these samples for considerably longer, only becoming undetectable by 16, 23, and 41 days after his onset of illness. we show that even mild household infections may have potentially serious consequences for pregnant women and their infants.

it is known that extremely premature infants do less well than more mature infants, and this fact has led some countries to adopt a "cutoff for viability" using birth weight or gestation. infants affected by intrauterine growth retardation are at additional risk of poor outcome. there are few data to inform decisions about viability and (dis)continuation of intensive care when both extreme prematurity and severe growth retardation are present. we focused on (1) premature infants affected by marked intrauterine growth retardation to determine if there was a cutoff weight centile below which the mortality sharply increased and (2) the short-term outcome of extremely premature and growth-retarded infants to determine a cutoff for viability. we evaluated preterm infants of 22-32 weeks' gestation if they were alive at the onset of labor and born to european mothers resident in the trent (united kingdom) health region between 1994 and 2003. infants were categorized into 6 weight centiles, and infants in each category were assessed for survival to discharge from the neonatal unit, duration of respiratory support, length of stay in the neonatal unit, and the age at death in nonsurvivors. we identified a total of 8228 infants who met the study criteria. of these, 4448 infants were male, 6194 were from singleton pregnancies, and 2887 were born at < or = 28 completed weeks of gestation. survival to discharge was markedly reduced in the infants born at < or = 28 weeks of gestation with a birth weight less than the 2nd centile. stillbirth was inversely related to birth weight centile in infants born before 29 weeks of gestation. the survival for infants born at < or = 28 weeks' gestation and having a birth weight in less than the 2nd centile is poor, and consideration should be given to modifying their management.

metoclopramide is a commonly used drug to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease in infants. given its widespread use and growing concern about toxicity in this population, we conducted a systematic review of metoclopramide for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease in infants. we performed a systematic search of pubmed and bibliographies of relevant review articles. we included cohort, case-control, and intervention studies of the efficacy, effectiveness, or toxicity of metoclopramide therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease in infants. we excluded case reports, case series, review articles, and abstracts. twelve articles met our inclusion criteria. of these, 11 were prospective trials, and 5 were randomized, blinded clinical trials. study size ranged from 6 to 77 patients. eight studies showed patient improvement with metoclopramide in at least 1 measured outcome; 1 study showed worsening symptoms with metoclopramide. of the 5 randomized, blinded trials, 2 showed no effect of metoclopramide on any outcome, and 2 showed a significant placebo effect. four studies commented on adverse effects of therapy, with irritability being the most frequently reported potential adverse effect of therapy. other reported adverse effects included dystonic reactions, drowsiness, oculogyric crisis, emesis, and apnea. among studies, there was marked heterogeneity in the patient populations, dosing, and outcomes studied. therefore, a meta-analysis was not performed. we both agreed on a us preventive service task force rating of "poor" for the level of evidence, leading to an "inconclusive" recommendation for the safety and efficacy of metoclopramide in infants. the current literature is insufficient to either support or oppose the use of metoclopramide for gastroesophageal reflux disease in infants. in the future, large blinded randomized clinical trials are needed to determine the efficacy and toxicity of metoclopramide in this population.

depression in adolescents is underrecognized and undertreated despite its poor long-term outcomes, including risk for suicide. primary care settings may be critical venues for the identification of depression, but there is little information about the usefulness of primary care interventions. we sought to examine the evidence for the treatment of depression in primary care settings, focusing on evidence concerning psychosocial, educational, and/or supportive intervention strategies. available data on brief psychosocial treatments for adolescent depression in primary settings were reviewed. given the paucity of direct studies, we also drew on related literature to summarize available evidence whether brief, psychosocial support from a member of the primary care team, with or without medication, might improve depression outcomes. we identified 37 studies relevant to treating adolescent depression in primary care settings. only 4 studies directly examined the impact of primary care-delivered psychosocial interventions for adolescent depression, but they suggest that such interventions can be effective. indirect evidence from other psychosocial/behavioral interventions, including anticipatory guidance and efforts to enhance treatment adherence, and adult depression studies also show benefits of primary care-delivered interventions as well as the impact of provider training to enhance psychosocial skills. there is potential for successful treatment of adolescent depression in primary care, in view of evidence that brief, psychosocial support, with or without medication, has been shown to improve a range of outcomes, including adolescent depression itself. given the great public health problem posed by adolescent depression, the likelihood that most depressed adolescents will not receive specialty services, and new guidelines for managing adolescent depression in primary care, clinicians may usefully consider initiation of supportive interventions in their primary care practices.

we report a case of bone pain associated with primary hyperparathyroidism in a patient with sickle cell disease. a 17-year-old girl with sickle cell disease (ss phenotype) was seen for bilateral knee and back pain. she had had recurrent severe vaso-occlusive crises and acute chest syndrome in the course of her disease. in the last 2 years, she had frequent visits to the emergency department for severe bone pain. she complained of long-standing fatigue and lethargy. her physical examination was normal. hydroxyurea treatment, as well as and long- and short-acting narcotics were given, with little improvement in symptoms. poor compliance with medication, family dysfunction, and potential narcotic addiction were felt to be significant contributors to the patient's symptoms. she was incidentally found to have an extremely elevated total calcium level of 3.19 mmol/l (range: 2.25-2.76) with an ionized calcium level of 1.9 mmol/l (range: 1.15-1.35). phosphorus level was 0.82 mmol/l (range: 0.90-1.50), alkaline phosphatase level was elevated at 519 u/l (range: 10-170), and parathyroid hormone level was extremely high at 1645 pg/ml (range: 10-60). her renal function was normal. ultrasonography of the neck and a sestamibi scan revealed a single left inferior parathyroid adenoma adjacent to the thyroid lobe. there was no evidence of an underlying multiple endocrine neoplasia. the patient was diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism. fluid hydration, hydrocortisone, calcitonin, and bisphosphonates were initiated for acute hypercalcemia management before surgical excision of the left parathyroid adenoma. on review of previous blood work, a borderline calcium level of 2.72 was present 18 months before this admission. two years postsurgery, she has normal renal function, calcium, and parathyroid hormone levels. the weekly visits to the emergency department for pain episodes decreased to 1 every 2 months within the first few months after her surgery. the decrease in pain episodes, even if it coincided with the treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism, may still reflect the natural evolution of sickle cell disease in this patient. however, the high morbidity associated with primary hyperparathyroidism was successfully prevented in this patient. primary hyperparathyroidism is rare in childhood. in a recent study, it occurred more commonly in female adolescents and was because of a single adenoma, as in our patient. significant morbidity, mainly secondary to renal dysfunction, was because of the delay in diagnosis after the onset of symptoms (2.0-4.2 years), emphasizing the need for a rapid diagnosis. sickle cell disease affects approximately 1 of every 600 blacks in north america. acute episodes of severe vaso-occlusive crisis account for > 90% of sickle cell-related hospitalizations and are a significant cause of morbidity in patients. there is no known association between sickle cell disease and primary hyperparathyroidism, and this case is most probably a random occurrence. however, as emphasized by this case report, pain may also be a harbinger of other disease processes in sickle cell disease. because management may vary, we suggest that care providers consider the diagnosis of vaso-occlusive crisis as the diagnosis of exclusion and that other etiologies for pain be envisaged in this patient population, especially in the presence of prolonged pain or unusual clinical, radiologic, or biological findings.

studies have indicated that internationally adopted children have an increased risk of developing precocious puberty, but no epidemiologic risk estimates have previously been calculated. we aimed to assess the risk of developing precocious puberty in intercountry adoptees, children immigrating with their family, and descendants of immigrants living in denmark. patients who were registered with the diagnosis of precocious puberty during the period 1993-2001 were identified through the national patient registry. the background population of children born from 1983 to 2001 were identified through the unique danish civil registration system and subsequently categorized as being danish (n = 1,062,333), adopted (n = 10,997), immigrating with their family (n = 72,181), or being descendants of immigrants (n = 128,152). the incidence rate ratio of precocious puberty was estimated by log-linear poisson regression. all rate ratios were adjusted for age and its interaction with gender and calendar year. p values were based on likelihood ratio tests, and 95% confidence intervals were calculated by wald's test. in the study period, 655 children developed precocious puberty during 5,627,763 person-years at risk. adopted children were followed during 39,978 person-years at risk, during which 45 girls and 6 boys developed precocious puberty. the risk of developing precocious puberty was significantly increased 10 to 20 times in adopted girls compared with girls with danish background. the risk of developing precocious puberty depended on the country of origin. in children immigrating with their family, the risk of developing precocious puberty was only marginally increased. older age at adoption significantly increased the risk of precocious puberty in adoptees independent of region of origin. the incidence rate ratio was significantly higher in children adopted after the age of 2. in children immigrating with their family, we found no effect of age at migration. in this large, nationwide, register-based study including 655 cases of precocious puberty, we found that intercountry boys and girls were 10 to 20 times more likely to develop precocious puberty compared with the danish reference group. older age at adoption significantly increased the risk of precocious puberty. uncertainty of the exact age is a well-known problem in adopted children, and systematic underestimation of age might bias the result. however, using the worst-case scenario that all children who according to the danish civil registration system were adopted after 2 years of age were in fact 1 year older, we still observed a highly increased risk of precocious puberty associated with adoption and especially with adoption after 2 years of age. surprisingly, the risk of precocious puberty was not increased in the large group of children adopted from korea. one case of precocious puberty was identified among korean children, whereas > 20 cases of precocious puberty would have been expected if the risk for a korean child was at the same level as observed among adopted children from india and south america. in the study population, 99% of korean children were adopted before 2 years of age, which may contribute to explaining our finding. in korea, children appointed for adoption are often living in foster care settings from birth to adoption, whereas most other countries are reported to take care of the children in orphanages before adoption. it can only be speculated whether a relation between preadoption living conditions and later risk of precocious puberty exists. genetic factors play a key role in the timing of puberty, and large variations in age at menarche are observed worldwide. age at menarche is reported to be in the same age range in south korea as in well-off populations in other parts of the world, indicating that the different risk of precocious puberty observed between korean and other adoptees probably cannot be explained by genetic factors alone. the finding that the risk of precocious puberty was significantly increased among adoptees in contrast to what was seen in children immigrating with their families contradicts a direct effect of migration. an increasing number of studies have shown long-term effects of certain prenatal and postnatal growth patterns, including advancement in pubertal maturation after poor intrauterine growth and catch-up growth during childhood. different growth patterns and dietary habits between adoptees and children immigrating with their families might contribute to explain our findings. it has been hypothesized that stressful psychosocial factors in infancy and childhood may lead to earlier pubertal maturation. in general, adoptees have experienced several traumatic life events, and it may be speculated that these events alter the susceptibility for developing precocious puberty. foreign-adopted children originating from regions other than korea had a 15- to 20-fold increased risk of precocious puberty compared with danish-born children, whereas adoptees originating from korea had no increased risk of precocious puberty. in addition, children immigrating with their families had no increased risk of precocious puberty. the effect of country of origin might be explained by genetic factors or by different environmental exposures and living conditions in the different countries. older age at adoption increased the risk for premature onset of puberty, which may suggest that environmental factors influence the risk of precocious pubertal development in adopted children.

our aim was to evaluate the clinical outcomes, safety, and efficacy of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty for renovascular hypertension in children. a retrospective review of data for all children with renovascular hypertension who underwent percutaneous transluminal angioplasty at a single center between 1984 and 2003 was performed. patients with renal transplants and inflammatory multisystem diseases were excluded. thirty-three children, 1.9 to 17.9 years of age (median: 10.3 years), underwent renal angioplasty and/or stenting. underlying syndromes were present in 10. on angiograms, 16 had bilateral renal artery stenosis, 15 intrarenal disease, 8 aortic stenosis, and 7 cerebrovascular disease. forty-eight percutaneous transluminal angioplasty procedures were performed, including 15 stenting procedures. there was a high rate of restenosis after stenting (7 of 19 cases, compared with 2 of 27 cases after balloon dilation). outcomes were cured (ie, blood pressure normal without treatment) for 9 patients, improved blood pressure with same or reduced treatment for 7, blood pressure maintained in >95th percentile because of cerebrovascular disease for 2, no change in blood pressure despite technical success for 10, and technical failure for 5. blood pressure control improved in 11 of 13 children who had main renal artery disease alone and in 6 of 20 with associated intrarenal disease or stenoses in other vascular beds. there was 1 procedure-related death and 5 minor complications. angioplasty produced clinically worthwhile improvement for approximately 50% of patients. high incidence rates of extrarenal involvement and intrarenal disease and a high restenosis rate after stenting accounted for poor blood pressure control in the rest.

perinatal regionalization has been organized into 3 ascending levels of care, fitting increasing degrees of pathology. current recommendations specify that very premature infants be referred prenatally to level iii facilities, yet not all very preterm neonates require level iii intensive care. the objective of our study was to determine the antenatal factors that, in association with gestational age, predict the need for neonatal intensive care in preterm infants, to match the size of birth with the level of care required. data were analyzed from a cohort of very preterm infants born in nine french regions in 1997. we defined the need for neonatal intensive care as follows: (1) the requirement for specialized management (mechanical ventilation for >48 hours, high frequency oscillation, or inhaled nitric oxide) or (2) poor outcome (transfer to a level iii facility within the first 2 days of life or early neonatal death). triplet pregnancies and pregnancies marked by fetal malformations or intensive care requirements for the mother before delivery were excluded. we focused our study on 1262 neonates aged 30, 31 and 32 weeks' gestation, where the need for intensive care was 42.8%, 33.2%, and 22.8%, respectively. multivariate analysis showed that the risk factors for intensive care requirement with low gestational age were twin pregnancies, maternal hypertension, antepartum hemorrhage, infection, and male gender. antenatal steroid therapy and premature rupture of membranes were protective factors against intensive care requirement. infants <31 weeks' gestation should be referred to level iii facilities. from 31 weeks' gestation, some infants can be safely handled in level iib facilities. however, the quality of perinatal regionalization may only be fully assessed by long-term follow-up.

congenital long-qt syndrome with 2:1 atrioventricular block presenting in the perinatal period is rare, has a poor prognosis, and leads to high risk for lethal ventricular arrhythmic events. an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator seems to be the most effective treatment in the prevention of arrhythmic sudden cardiac death in patients with long-qt syndrome. technical limitations and risks associated with implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in asymptomatic infants is considered too great to justify use for primary prophylaxis against sudden cardiac death. in this case report we describe the first successful parental use of an automated external defibrillator prescribed for primary prophylaxis against sudden cardiac death in an infant with long-qt syndrome.

anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is associated with multiple infections and a poor clinical outcome. hypomorphic mutations in nuclear factor kappab essential modulator (nemo)/ikappab kinase complex and a hypermorphic mutation in inhibitor alpha of nuclear factor kappab (ikappabalpha) both result in impaired nuclear factor kappab activation and are associated with x-recessive and autosomal-dominant forms of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency, respectively. autosomal-dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is also associated with a severe t-cell phenotype. it is not known whether hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can cure immune deficiency in children with anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency. a boy with autosomal-dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency and a severe t-cell immunodeficiency underwent transplantation at 1 year of age with haploidentical t-cell-depleted bone marrow after myeloablative conditioning. engraftment occurred, with full hematopoietic chimerism. seven years after transplantation, clinical outcome is favorable, with normal t-cell development. as expected, the developmental features of the anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia syndrome have appeared and persisted. this is the first report of successful hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in a child with anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency. hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is well tolerated and efficiently cures the profound immunodeficiency associated with autosomal-dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.

the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis presents challenges in children, because symptoms are nonspecific, sputa are not accessible, and mycobacterium tuberculosis cultures and smears often are negative. the microscopic observation drug susceptibility technique is a simple, inexpensive method for mycobacterium tuberculosis isolation with superior speed and sensitivity over lowenstein-jensen culture in studies of adults with pulmonary tuberculosis. the objective of this study was to determine whether microscopic observation drug susceptibility culture can improve the sensitivity and the speed of mycobacterium tuberculosis recovery among peruvian children with symptoms suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis. two specimens of each type (gastric aspirate, nasopharyngeal aspirate, and stool specimens) were collected from each patient, examined by auramine stain, and cultured by microscopic observation drug susceptibility and lowenstein-jensen techniques. patients (n = 165) were enrolled between april 2002 and february 2004 at the instituto de salud del niño, the major pediatric hospital in lima, peru. inclusion criteria were age < or = 12 years, stegen-toledo clinical score > or = 5 points, and absence of antituberculous therapy. the main outcome measurements were (1) proportion of specimens that were culture positive by microscopic observation drug susceptibility versus lowenstein-jensen and (2) days required for positive culture result, stratified by specimen type and auramine stain result. fifteen (9%) patients had at least 1 positive mycobacterium tuberculosis culture (from stool in 3 cases, nasopharyngeal aspirate in 8 cases, and gastric aspirate in 15 cases). thirty-eight culture-positive specimens were obtained (22 gastric aspirate, 12 nasopharyngeal aspirates, and 4 stools). microscopic observation drug susceptibility provided significantly more positive cultures than lowenstein-jensen (33 of 38 specimens culture positive by microscopic observation drug susceptibility vs 21 of 38 by lowenstein-jensen). this was attributed to enhanced recovery of mycobacterium tuberculosis from auramine-negative specimens (19 of 23 by microscopic observation drug susceptibility vs 9 of 23 by lowenstein-jensen), in contrast to similar detection rates for the 2 tests with auramine-positive samples. similar results were found for analyses that were limited to gastric aspirates. isolation was faster by microscopic observation drug susceptibility than lowenstein-jensen. isolation of mycobacterium tuberculosis from children with suspected pulmonary tuberculosis by microscopic observation drug susceptibility demonstrated greater yield and faster recovery than by lowenstein-jensen method, significantly improving local capabilities to detect pediatric tuberculosis in resource-poor settings.

our goal was to assess the effect of episodes of neonatal hypoglycemia on subsequent neurodevelopment. we searched medline and embase for cohort studies on subsequent neurodevelopment after episodes of hypoglycemia in the first week of life. reference lists of available studies were reviewed, and content experts were contacted for additional studies. included studies were selected and appraised for methodologic quality by 2 reviewers. methodologic quality was assessed according to well-accepted criteria for prognostic studies. eventually, all studies were given an overall quality score: poor, moderate, or high quality. studies in the latter 2 categories were considered for quantitative data analysis. eighteen eligible studies were identified. the overall methodologic quality of the included studies was considered poor in 16 studies and high in 2 studies. pooling of results of the 2 high-quality studies was deemed inappropriate because of major clinical and methodologic heterogeneity. none of the studies provided a valid estimate of the effect of neonatal hypoglycemia on neurodevelopment. building on the strengths and weaknesses of existing studies, we developed a proposal for an "optimal" future study design. recommendations for clinical practice cannot be based on valid scientific evidence in this field. to assess the effect of neonatal hypoglycemia on subsequent neurodevelopment, a well-designed prospective study should be undertaken. we submit a design for a study that may answer the still-open questions.

in conducting reviews on the effectiveness of physiotherapy interventions on children with cerebral palsy, the assessment of trials can be hampered by problems in reporting. therefore, we set out to evaluate trial reporting by using the consolidated standards of reporting trials (consort) statement recommendations. randomized, controlled trials published in 1990 or later were identified in literature searches for reviews on the effectiveness of physiotherapy interventions on children with cerebral palsy. two independent reviewers evaluated the trial reporting by using a modified 33-item consolidated standards of reporting trials checklist. we identified 15 randomized, controlled trials. almost half (48%) of the applicable items were reported adequately. inadequate reporting was found in the following items: outcome measures, sample-size determination, details of the sequence generation, allocation concealment and implementation of the randomization, success of assessor blinding, recruitment and follow-up dates, intention-to-treat analysis, precision of the effect size, co-interventions, and adverse events. only a small number of sufficiently reported trials were found. because nearly all items had been described in at least 1 article, high-quality reporting seems feasible. assessment of trials depends on appropriate reporting, and poor reporting jeopardizes judgments on the clinical implications. authors of randomized, controlled trials are encouraged to follow the consolidated standards of reporting trials criteria. there is a clear need to improve the quality of reporting of trials in this field.

the goals were to compare early school-age neurodevelopmental and respiratory outcomes for children who were treated with either early (<3 days) or delayed selective (>15 days) postnatal corticosteroid therapy and to compare systemic dexamethasone treatment with inhaled budesonide treatment. one hundred twenty-seven (84%) of 152 survivors from the united kingdom and ireland who were recruited to the open study of early corticosteroid treatment, a randomized trial of inhaled and systemic corticosteroid therapy to prevent chronic lung disease, were traced and assessed at a median age of 7 years. outcome measures were level of disability, presence of cerebral palsy, cognitive ability, behavioral difficulties and competencies, growth, and respiratory symptoms. results were adjusted for potential confounding variables (gestational age, birth weight, gender, prenatal steroid therapy, method of delivery, apgar score at 5 minutes, and clinical risk index for babies score). there were no significant differences among the treatment groups in cognitive ability, behavioral competencies or difficulties, overall disability rates, cerebral palsy, combined outcomes of death or cerebral palsy and death or moderate/severe disability, growth, respiratory morbidity, or diastolic blood pressure. those assigned to dexamethasone were more likely to have high systolic blood pressure and to have a diagnosis of asthma than were those assigned to budesonide. although postnatal steroid therapy has been associated with poor long-term outcomes, this study failed to show significant differences in cognitive function between dexamethasone- and budesonide-allocated groups. there may be increased systolic blood pressure and a greater likelihood of developing asthma in childhood after postnatal dexamethasone treatment.

to estimate the prevalence and correlates of unmet needs for mental health care services for children with special health care needs and their families. we use the national survey of children with special health care needs to estimate the prevalence of unmet mental health care needs among children with special health care needs (1-17 years old) and their families. using logistic-regression models, we also assess the independent impact of child and family factors on unmet needs. substantial numbers of children with special health care needs and members of their families have unmet needs for mental health care services. children with special health care needs who were poor, uninsured, and were without a usual source of care were statistically significantly more likely to report that their mental health care needs were unmet. more severely affected children and those with emotional, developmental, or behavioral conditions were also statistically significantly more likely to report that their mental health care needs went unmet. families of severely affected children or of children with emotional, developmental, or behavioral conditions were also statistically significantly more likely to report that their mental health care needs went unmet. our results indicate that children with special health care needs and their families are at risk for not receiving needed mental health care services. furthermore, we find that children in families of lower socioeconomic status are disproportionately reporting higher rates of unmet needs. these data suggest that broader policies to identify and connect families with needed services are warranted but that child- and family-centered approaches alone will not meet the needs of these children and their families. other interventions such as anti-poverty and insurance expansion efforts may be needed as well.

to compare by age and glycemic control continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion with multiple daily injections in youth with type 1 diabetes. the files of 279 patients who had type 1 diabetes and switched from multiple daily injections to continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion between 1998 and 2003 were reviewed for glycemic control, body mass index standard deviation score, and adverse events. patients were divided by age as follows: 23 prepubertal (median age: 5.4; range: 1.6-8.6 years), 127 adolescent (median age: 13.7; range 9-17 years), and 129 young adult (median age: 22.8; range: 17-40 years). the data were compared between the 12 months of multiple daily injections that preceded continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion and the period after the start of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for the whole cohort and by age group. a significant decrease in hemoglobin a1c was demonstrated after the start of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion use for the entire cohort (-0.51%) and for the prepubertal (-0.48%), adolescent (-0.26%), and young adult (-0.76%) groups. there was a significant interaction between the change in hemoglobin a1c level and hemoglobin a1c value at initiation of pump therapy (-1.7% for patients with hemoglobin a1c > or = 10%; 0.2% for patients with hemoglobin a1c < or = 7%). the rate of severe hypoglycemic episodes decreased significantly in the adolescent group, from 36.5 to 11.1 events per 100 patient-years, and in the young adult group, from 58.1 to 23.3. there was no significant change in the rate of diabetic ketoacidosis between the 2 periods. the young adults showed a significant decrease in body mass index standard deviation scores (-0.08 +/- 0.37). continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion improves glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes, especially in those with a history of poor glycemic control. this improvement is associated with a decrease in the rate of severe hypoglycemia in the absence of weight gain.

to develop a set of quality indicators for the neurodevelopmental follow-up care of very low birth weight (vlbw; <1500 g) children. we reviewed the scientific literature on predictors of neurodevelopmental outcomes for vlbw children and the clinical practice guidelines relevant to their care after hospital discharge. an expert panel with members nominated by the american academy of pediatrics, the national institute of child health and human development, the vermont oxford network, and the california children's service was convened. we used a modified delphi method to evaluate and select the quality-of-care indicators. the panel recommended a total of 70 indicators in 5 postdischarge follow-up areas: general care; physical health; vision, hearing, speech, and language; developmental and behavioral assessment; and psychosocial issues. of these, 58 (83%) indicators were in preventive care, 5 (7%) were in acute care, and 7 (10%) were in chronic care. the quality indicators cover follow-up care for vlbw infants with various medical conditions. given the elevated rates of long-term neurodevelopmental disabilities and the potential impact of poor health care, this new set of indicators provides an opportunity to assess and monitor the quality of follow-up care with the ultimate aim of improving the quality of care for this high-risk population.

the goals were to describe the management of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among children, to examine the tolerability of second-line antituberculosis agents among children, and to report the outcomes of children treated for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in poor urban communities in lima, peru, a city with high tuberculosis prevalence. a retrospective analysis of data for 38 children <15 years of age with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, either documented with drug sensitivity testing of the child's tuberculosis isolate or suspected on the basis of the presence of clinical symptoms for a child with a household contact with documented multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, was performed. all 38 children initiated a supervised individualized treatment regimen for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis between july 1999 and july 2003. each child received 18 to 24 months of therapy with > or =5 first- or second-line drugs to which their mycobacterium tuberculosis strain was presumed to be sensitive. forty-five percent of the children had malnutrition or anemia at the time of diagnosis, 29% had severe radiographic findings (defined as bilateral or cavitary disease), and 13% had extrapulmonary disease. forty-five percent of the children were hospitalized initially because of the severity of illness. adverse events were observed for 42% of the children, but no events required suspension of therapy for >5 days. ninety-five percent of the children (36 of 38 children) achieved cures or probable cures, 1 child (2.5%) died, and 1 child (2.5%) defaulted from therapy. multidrug-resistant tuberculosis disease among children can be treated successfully in resource-poor settings. treatment is well tolerated by children, and severe adverse events with second-line agents are rare.

our goal was to compare the prevalence of behavioral problems between very preterm children and term children at 3 years of age and examine the factors associated with behavioral problems in very preterm children. we conducted a prospective population-based cohort study: the epipage (etude epidémiologique sur les petits ages gestationnels) study. all infants born between 22 and 32 weeks of gestation in 9 regions of france in 1997 were included and compared with a control group of infants born at term. sociodemographic status, obstetric, and neonatal data were collected at birth and in the neonatal units. at 3 years of age, the behavioral problems of 1228 very preterm singleton children without major neurodisabilities, and 447 term children were studied using the strengths and difficulties questionnaire completed by the parents. very preterm children were more likely than controls to have behavioral difficulties. among very preterm children, several medical conditions were associated with a high total difficulty score: major neonatal cerebral lesions diagnosed by cranial ultrasonographic studies, hospitalization within the last year, poor health, and psychomotor delay. a high birth order and sociodemographic factors such as young maternal age and low educational level of the mother were also identified as risk factors for behavioral difficulties. the differences between very preterm children and controls remained significant after adjustment for sociodemographic characteristics, neonatal complications, and neurodevelopmental status, for a high total difficulties score, hyperactivity, conduct problems, and for peer problems. for emotional problems, the difference was at the limit of significance. very preterm children have a higher risk of behavioral problems at 3 years of age compared with term-born children. health and neurodevelopmental status of the child were significantly associated with behavioral difficulties.

investigative efforts to improve monitoring during sedation for patients of all ages are part of a national agenda for patient safety. according to the institute of medicine, recent technological advances in patient monitoring have contributed to substantially decreased mortality for people receiving general anesthesia in operating room settings. patient safety has not been similarly targeted for the several million children annually in the united states who receive moderate sedation without endotracheal intubation. critical event analyses have documented that hypoxemia secondary to depressed respiratory activity is a principal risk factor for near misses and death in this population. current guidelines for monitoring patient safety during moderate sedation in children call for continuous pulse oximetry and visual assessment, which may not detect alveolar hypoventilation until arterial oxygen desaturation has occurred. microstream capnography may provide an "early warning system" by generating real-time waveforms of respiratory activity in nonintubated patients. the aim of this study was to determine whether intervention based on capnography indications of alveolar hypoventilation reduces the incidence of arterial oxygen desaturation in nonintubated children receiving moderate sedation for nonsurgical procedures. we included 163 children undergoing 174 elective gastrointestinal procedures with moderate sedation in a pediatric endoscopy unit in a randomized, controlled trial. all of the patients received routine care, including 2-l supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula. investigators, patients, and endoscopy staff were blinded to additional capnography monitoring. in the intervention arm, trained independent observers signaled to clinical staff if capnograms indicated alveolar hypoventilation for >15 seconds. in the control arm, observers signaled if capnograms indicated alveolar hypoventilation for >60 seconds. endoscopy nurses responded to signals in both arms by encouraging patients to breathe deeply, even if routine patient monitoring did not indicate a change in respiratory status. our primary outcome measure was patient arterial oxygen desaturation defined as a pulse oximetry reading of <95% for >5 seconds. secondary outcome measures included documented assessments of abnormal ventilation, termination of the procedure secondary to concerns for patient safety, as well as other more rare adverse events including need for bag-mask ventilation, sedation reversal, or seizures. children randomly assigned to the intervention arm were significantly less likely to experience arterial oxygen desaturation than children in the control arm. two study patients had documented adverse events, with no procedures terminated for patient safety concerns. intervention and control patients did not differ in baseline characteristics. endoscopy staff documented poor ventilation in 3% of all procedures and no apnea. capnography indicated alveolar hypoventilation during 56% of procedures and apnea during 24%. we found no change in magnitude or statistical significance of the intervention effect when we adjusted the analysis for age, sedative dose, or other covariates. the results of this controlled effectiveness trial support routine use of microstream capnography to detect alveolar hypoventilation and reduce hypoxemia during procedural sedation in children. in addition, capnography allowed early detection of arterial oxygen desaturation because of alveolar hypoventilation in the presence of supplemental oxygen. the current standard of care for monitoring all patients receiving sedation relies overtly on pulse oximetry, which does not measure ventilation. most medical societies and regulatory organizations consider moderate sedation to be safe but also acknowledge serious associated risks, including suboptimal ventilation, airway obstruction, apnea, hypoxemia, hypoxia, and cardiopulmonary arrest. the results of this controlled trial suggest that microstream capnography improves the current standard of care for monitoring sedated children by allowing early detection of respiratory compromise, prompting intervention to minimize hypoxemia. integrating capnography into patient monitoring protocols may ultimately improve the safety of nonintubated patients receiving moderate sedation.

no consensus exists about whether to conduct prevaccination serotesting or to presumptively vaccinate internationally adopted and immigrant infants with inactivated polio (ipv) and diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis (dtap) immunizations. to study the clinical and economic outcomes from a societal perspective of prevaccination serotesting in a hypothetical 12-month-old internationally adopted or immigrant infant. a decision analysis model was developed comparing presumptive vaccination with ipv versus serotesting for poliovirus type 1, 2, and 3 antibodies followed by vaccination in unprotected patients. a similar decision analysis model was developed comparing presumptive vaccination with dtap versus serotesting for diphtheria and tetanus toxoid antibodies. the main outcome measures were cost per patient protected from polio, diphtheria, and tetanus. compared with presumptive immunization, prevaccination serotesting for polio increases the cost per patient from $57 to $62 and decreases the percentage of patients protected against polio from 95.3% to 94.0%. serotesting for diphtheria and tetanus increases the cost per patient from $62 to $119 and increases the percentage of patients protected against both diphtheria and tetanus from 91.5% to 92.3%. presumptive immunization with dtap costs less and is more clinically effective than serotesting if >80% of patients do not complete the full vaccine series or if antibody seroprevalence to both diphtheria and tetanus is <51%. presumptive immunization for polio improves outcomes and saves costs compared with prevaccination serotesting in internationally adopted and immigrant infants. the results for dtap are less definitive, although immunization is the preferred strategy in populations with poor vaccine compliance or low seroprevalence of antibodies to diphtheria and tetanus.

a number of studies have shown that victimization from bullying behavior is associated with substantial adverse effects on physical and psychological health, but it is unclear which comes first, the victimization or the health-related symptoms. in our present study, we investigated whether victimization precedes psychosomatic and psychosocial symptoms or whether these symptoms precede victimization. six-month cohort study with baseline measurements taken in the fall of 1999 and follow-up measurements in the spring of 2000. eighteen elementary schools in the netherlands. the study included 1118 children aged 9 to 11 years, who participated by filling out a questionnaire on both occasions of data collection. a self-administered questionnaire measured victimization from bullying, as well as a wide variety of psychosocial and psychosomatic symptoms, including depression, anxiety, bedwetting, headaches, sleeping problems, abdominal pain, poor appetite, and feelings of tension or tiredness. victims of bullying had significantly higher chances of developing new psychosomatic and psychosocial problems compared with children who were not bullied. in contrast, some psychosocial, but not physical, health symptoms preceded bullying victimization. children with depressive symptoms had a significantly higher chance of being newly victimized, as did children with anxiety. many psychosomatic and psychosocial health problems follow an episode of bullying victimization. these findings stress the importance for doctors and health practitioners to establish whether bullying plays a contributing role in the etiology of such symptoms. furthermore, our results indicate that children with depressive symptoms and anxiety are at increased risk of being victimized. because victimization could have an adverse effect on children's attempts to cope with depression or anxiety, it is important to consider teaching these children skills that could make them less vulnerable to bullying behavior.

the high visibility of controversies regarding vaccination makes it increasingly important to understand how parents decide whether to vaccinate their infants. the purpose of this research was to investigate decision-making about vaccinations for infants. we conducted qualitative, open-ended interviews. subjects included mothers 1 to 3 days postpartum and again at 3 to 6 months. we addressed 3 topics: attitudes to vaccination, knowledge about vaccination, and decision-making. mothers who intended to have their infants vaccinated ("vaccinators," n = 25) either agreed with or did not question vaccination or they accepted vaccination but had significant concerns. mothers who did not intend to vaccinate ("nonvaccinators," n = 8) either completely rejected vaccination or they purposely delayed vaccinating/chose only some vaccines. knowledge about which vaccines are recommended for children was poor among both vaccinators and nonvaccinators. the theme of trust in the medical profession was the central concept that underpinned all of the themes about decision-making. promoters of vaccination included trusting the pediatrician, feeling satisfied by the pediatrician's discussion about vaccines, not wanting to diverge from the cultural norm, and wanting to adhere to the social contact. inhibitors included feeling alienated by or unable to trust the pediatrician, having a trusting relationship with an influential homeopath/naturopath or other person who did not believe in vaccinating, worry about permanent side effects, beliefs that vaccine-preventable diseases are not serious, and feeling that since other children are vaccinated their child is not at risk. trust or lack of trust and a relationship with a pediatrician or another influential person were pivotal for decision-making of new mothers about vaccinating their children. attempts to work with mothers who are concerned about vaccinating their infants should focus not only on providing facts about vaccines but also on developing trusting and positive relationships.

this publication presents the 2005 american heart association (aha) guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) and emergency cardiovascular care (ecc) of the pediatric patient and the 2005 american academy of pediatrics/aha guidelines for cpr and ecc of the neonate. the guidelines are based on the evidence evaluation from the 2005 international consensus conference on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care science with treatment recommendations, hosted by the american heart association in dallas, texas, january 23-30, 2005. the "2005 aha guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care" contain recommendations designed to improve survival from sudden cardiac arrest and acute life-threatening cardiopulmonary problems. the evidence evaluation process that was the basis for these guidelines was accomplished in collaboration with the international liaison committee on resuscitation (ilcor). the ilcor process is described in more detail in the "international consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care science with treatment recommendations." the recommendations in the "2005 aha guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care" confirm the safety and effectiveness of many approaches, acknowledge that other approaches may not be optimal, and recommend new treatments that have undergone evidence evaluation. these new recommendations do not imply that care involving the use of earlier guidelines is unsafe. in addition, it is important to note that these guidelines will not apply to all rescuers and all victims in all situations. the leader of a resuscitation attempt may need to adapt application of the guidelines to unique circumstances. the following are the major pediatric advanced life support changes in the 2005 guidelines: there is further caution about the use of endotracheal tubes. laryngeal mask airways are acceptable when used by experienced providers. cuffed endotracheal tubes may be used in infants (except newborns) and children in in-hospital settings provided that cuff inflation pressure is kept <20 cm h2o. confirmation of tube placement requires clinical assessment and assessment of exhaled carbon dioxide (co2); esophageal detector devices may be considered for use in children weighing >20 kg who have a perfusing rhythm. correct placement must be verified when the tube is inserted, during transport, and whenever the patient is moved. during cpr with an advanced airway in place, rescuers will no longer perform "cycles" of cpr. instead, the rescuer performing chest compressions will perform them continuously at a rate of 100/minute without pauses for ventilation. the rescuer providing ventilation will deliver 8 to 10 breaths per minute (1 breath approximately every 6-8 seconds). timing of 1 shock, cpr, and drug administration during pulseless arrest has changed and now is identical to that for advanced cardiac life support. routine use of high-dose epinephrine is not recommended. lidocaine is de-emphasized, but it can be used for treatment of ventricular fibrillation/pulseless ventricular tachycardia if amiodarone is not available. induced hypothermia (32-34 degrees c for 12-24 hours) may be considered if the child remains comatose after resuscitation. indications for the use of inodilators are mentioned in the postresuscitation section. termination of resuscitative efforts is discussed. it is noted that intact survival has been reported following prolonged resuscitation and absence of spontaneous circulation despite 2 doses of epinephrine. the following are the major neonatal resuscitation changes in the 2005 guidelines: supplementary oxygen is recommended whenever positive-pressure ventilation is indicated for resuscitation; free-flow oxygen should be administered to infants who are breathing but have central cyanosis. although the standard approach to resuscitation is to use 100% oxygen, it is reasonable to begin resuscitation with an oxygen concentration of less than 100% or to start with no supplementary oxygen (ie, start with room air). if the clinician begins resuscitation with room air, it is recommended that supplementary oxygen be available to use if there is no appreciable improvement within 90 seconds after birth. in situations where supplementary oxygen is not readily available, positive-pressure ventilation should be administered with room air. current recommendations no longer advise routine intrapartum oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal suctioning for infants born to mothers with meconium staining of amniotic fluid. endotracheal suctioning for infants who are not vigorous should be performed immediately after birth. a self-inflating bag, a flow-inflating bag, or a t-piece (a valved mechanical device designed to regulate pressure and limit flow) can be used to ventilate a newborn. an increase in heart rate is the primary sign of improved ventilation during resuscitation. exhaled co2 detection is the recommended primary technique to confirm correct endotracheal tube placement when a prompt increase in heart rate does not occur after intubation. the recommended intravenous (iv) epinephrine dose is 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg per dose. higher iv doses are not recommended, and iv administration is the preferred route. although access is being obtained, administration of a higher dose (up to 0.1 mg/kg) through the endotracheal tube may be considered. it is possible to identify conditions associated with high mortality and poor outcome in which withholding resuscitative efforts may be considered reasonable, particularly when there has been the opportunity for parental agreement. the following guidelines must be interpreted according to current regional outcomes: when gestation, birth weight, or congenital anomalies are associated with almost certain early death and when unacceptably high morbidity is likely among the rare survivors, resuscitation is not indicated. examples are provided in the guidelines. in conditions associated with a high rate of survival and acceptable morbidity, resuscitation is nearly always indicated. in conditions associated with uncertain prognosis in which survival is borderline, the morbidity rate is relatively high, and the anticipated burden to the child is high, parental desires concerning initiation of resuscitation should be supported. infants without signs of life (no heartbeat and no respiratory effort) after 10 minutes of resuscitation show either a high mortality rate or severe neurodevelopmental disability. after 10 minutes of continuous and adequate resuscitative efforts, discontinuation of resuscitation may be justified if there are no signs of life.

x-linked osteopetrosis, anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia, and immunodeficiency (xl-o-eda-id) is a disorder that is caused by hypomorphic mutations in the nuclear factor kappab essential modulator (nemo). these mutations lead to an impaired nf-kappab activation. in vitro analyses and studies in animal models show that inhibition of nf-kappab leads to a decrease of cytokine production and t-cell proliferation. patients classically display poor or delayed inflammatory response to infections. we describe a boy with xl-o-eda-id, 1167-1168insc nemo mutation, and recurrent infections. in early infancy, he experienced hemophagocytosis with transient deficiency of natural killer activity. increased immunoglobulin m levels in blood resulted from a monoclonal immunoglobulin m gammopathy. blood t-cell numbers were constantly increased, most probably resulting from a peripheral t-cell expansion. our observations suggest that patients with hypomorphic nemo mutations and repeated infections may experience inflammatory dysregulation.

the successes of the united states and other developed countries in the prevention and treatment of pediatric hiv/aids have not been replicated in the developing world, where children continue to become infected with hiv and die from hiv/aids at astounding rates. children are underrepresented among recipients of antiretroviral therapy in almost every setting worldwide where treatment programs have been established. the barriers to scaling up hiv/aids care and treatment globally are substantial. nevertheless, nearly a decade after the introduction of pediatric highly active antiretroviral therapy in the united states, the opportunity finally exists to provide treatment to huge numbers of hiv-infected children in the developing world, changing forever the way that pediatric hiv/aids is perceived and managed. we propose the creation of a clinical centers of excellence network and pediatric aids corps of us pediatric health professionals, increased support for pediatric research relevant to resource-poor settings, commitment of the us government and others to proportionate funding for pediatric hiv/aids care and treatment, expanded availability of pediatric antiretroviral drug formulations, and a renewed commitment to collaborative partnerships as practical steps that can be taken to dramatically expand access of hiv-infected children and families in the developing world to health-restoring, life-prolonging care and treatment.

the objective of this study was to determine if depressed mood among youth with diabetes was associated with type and duration of diabetes, mean glycosylated hemoglobin (hba1c) level, and the frequency of diabetic ketoacidosis (dka) and hypoglycemic episodes, hospitalizations, and emergency department (ed) visits. a total of 2672 youth (aged 10-21 years) who had diabetes for a mean duration of 5 years completed a search study visit, in which their hba1c was measured and information about their demographic characteristics, diabetes type and duration, and episodes of dka, hypoglycemia, hospitalizations, and ed visits over the previous 6 months was collected. their level of depressed mood was measured using the center for epidemiologic studies depression scale (ces-d). among these youth, 14% had mildly (ces-d 16-23) and 8.6% had moderately or severely (ces-d > or =24) depressed mood. females had a higher mean ces-d score than males. after adjusting for demographic factors, and duration of diabetes, we found the prevalence of depressed mood to be higher among males with type 2 diabetes than those with type 1 diabetes and to be higher among females with comorbidities than those without comorbidities. higher mean hba1c and frequency of ed visits were associated with depressed mood. the prevalence of depressed mood among youth with diabetes was similar to that of published estimates of depressed mood among youth without diabetes. physicians and other health care professionals should consider screening youth with diabetes for depressed mood in clinical settings, particularly youth with poor glycemic control, those with a history of frequent ed visits, males with type 2 diabetes, and females with comorbidities.

disparities in child health are a major public health concern. however, it is unclear whether these are predominantly the result of low income, race, or other social risk factors that may contribute to their health disadvantage. although others have examined the effects of the accumulation of risk factors, this methodology has not been applied to child health. we tested 4 social risk factors (poverty, minority race/ethnicity, low parental education, and not living with both biological parents) to assess whether they have cumulative effects on child health and examined whether access to health care reduced health disparities. we analyzed data on 57,553 children <18 years from the 1994 and 1995 national health interview survey disability supplement. of the 4 risk factors, 3 (poverty, low parental education, and single-parent household) were consistently associated with child health. these were summed, generating the social disadvantage index (range: 0-3). a total of 43.6% of children had no social disadvantages, 30.8% had 1, 15.6% had 2, and 10.0% had all 3. compared with those with no social disadvantages, the odds ratios (ors) of being in "good, fair, or poor health" (versus "excellent or very good") were 1.95 for 1 risk, 3.22 for 2 risks, and 4.06 for 3 risks. ors of having a chronic condition increased from 1.25 (1 risk) to 1.60 (2 risks) to 2.11 (3 risks). ors for activity limitation were 1.51 (1 risk) to 2.14 (2 risks) and 2.88 (3 risks). controlling for health insurance did not affect these findings. the accumulation of social disadvantage among children was strongly associated with poorer child health and having insurance did not reduce the observed health disparities.

to examine the stability of functional outcomes 2 years after injury among children who sustained a traumatic brain injury (tbi) before 2 years of age and to examine the characteristics of the families caring for these children. all north carolina-resident children who were hospitalized between january 2000 and december 2001 in any of the state's 9 picus and survived a tbi that occurred on or before their second birthday were eligible to participate in the prospective cohort study. child health status, use of ancillary medical resources, and family characteristics were assessed through maternal caregiver interviews approximately 2 years after injury. comparisons were made among injury types (inflicted versus noninflicted). there were 112 children who survived a tbi during the 2-year study period. fifty-seven (79%) of the 72 maternal caregivers who had completed an interview 1 year after the child's injury participated in the year 2 interview. most children (67%) had an outcome of mild disability or better at year 2, with 45% functioning at an age-appropriate level. children's outcomes did not differ significantly at year 2 according to the mechanism of injury. the majority (67%) of children retained their pediatric overall performance category scores from year 1 to year 2. children who changed were as likely to show improvement as deterioration. children differed very little across time, as measured with the stein-jessup functional status ii (revised) scale. families tended to have multiple environmental factors that could put their children at risk for poor developmental outcomes, including living below the poverty level (22%) and low social capital (39%). the children in this cohort had relatively stable functional outcomes from year 1 to year 2 after injury. this population of children remains very vulnerable to poor developmental outcomes secondary to the effects of their tbi and environmental factors.

the objectives of this study were to delineate the etiologic profile and neurodevelopmental outcome of neonatal seizures in the current era of neonatal intensive care and to identify predictors of neurodevelopmental outcome in survivors. eighty-nine term infants with clinical neonatal seizures underwent neurologic examination, electroencephalography (eeg), neuroimaging, and extensive diagnostic tests in the newborn period. after discharge, all infants underwent regular neurologic evaluations and, at 12 to 18 months, formal neurodevelopmental testing. we tested the prognostic value of seizure etiology, neurologic examination, eeg, and neuroimaging. etiology was found in 77 infants. global cerebral hypoxia-ischemia, focal cerebral hypoxia-ischemia, and intracranial hemorrhage were most common. neonatal mortality was 7%; 28% of the survivors had poor long-term outcome. association between seizure etiology and outcome was strong, with cerebral dysgenesis and global hypoxia-ischemia associated with poor outcome. normal neonatal period/early infancy neurologic examination was associated with uniformly favorable outcome at 12 to 18 months; abnormal examination lacked specificity. normal/mildly abnormal neonatal eeg had favorable outcome, particularly if neonatal neuroimaging was normal. moderate/severely abnormal eeg, and multifocal/diffuse cortical or primarily deep gray matter lesions, had a worse outcome. mortality associated with neonatal seizures has declined although long-term neurodevelopmental morbidity remains unchanged. seizure etiology and background eeg patterns remain powerful prognostic factors. diagnostic advances have changed the etiologic distribution for neonatal seizures and improved accuracy of outcome prediction. global cerebral hypoxia-ischemia, the most common etiology, is responsible for the large majority of infants with poor long-term outcome.

we set out to determine the accuracy and rapidity of various intrapartum group b streptococcus (gbs) colonization tests. we performed a systematic review of test-accuracy studies, which were identified without language restriction from medline and cochrane databases; bibliographies of known primary and review articles; and contact with authors, experts, and manufacturers. studies were selected if they tested pregnant women intrapartum for gbs colonization and confirmed by "gold-standard" laboratory cultures. two reviewers independently selected studies and extracted data on their characteristics, quality, and results. accuracy data were used to form 2 x 2 contingency tables. heterogeneity was assessed, and lrs for positive and negative test results were pooled in subgroups of studies of various tests. there were 29 test-accuracy studies in 15,691 women, evaluating 6 different tests: polymerase chain reaction (pcr), optical immunoassay (oia), dna hybridization, enzyme immunoassay, latex agglutination, and islam starch medium tests. the methodologic quality of the studies was generally poor. the most accurate was the real-time pcr test, but it was less rapid than oia test. real-time pcr took 40 minutes to complete, whereas the oia took 30 minutes. real-time pcr and oia are candidates for rapid near patient intrapartum gbs testing to determine the need for antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent neonatal gbs disease. before implementation in practice, a robust technology assessment of their accuracy, acceptability, and cost-effectiveness is required.

given that more than two thirds of uninsured children in california are eligible for public health insurance coverage, this study examined differences in primary care access and health status between uninsured but eligible (ube) children and those who were insured. using data on 19485 children from the 2001 california health interview survey, this study examined differences in primary care access and health status for ube children versus those who were enrolled in public coverage. results are stratified by profiles of other risk factors (rf) for poor access: nonwhite, low income, low parent education, and non-english speaking. ube children were less likely than publicly enrolled children to have a physician visit in the past year, dental visit in the past year, and a regular source of care. on the basis of differences between the ube children and enrollees in the prevalence of each dependent measure, ube children with multiple rfs experienced greater disparities than ube children with fewer rfs. for example, enrollees were more likely than ube children to have a regular source of care among children with 2, 3, or 4 rfs (differences of 26, 26, and 25 percentage points, respectively) compared with 1 rf (19 percentage points) and 0 rfs (12 percentage points). a similar pattern was found for dental visits but not physician visits. although there was no difference in health status between ube children and enrollees overall, enrollees were more likely than ube children to have excellent/very good health status among children with 2 rfs (difference of 9 percentage points), 3 rfs (12 percentage points), and 4 rfs (11 percentage points). this study demonstrates that ube children in california have poorer access to care compared with enrollees, and those with the highest levels of risk have poorer health status. this suggests that providing insurance to these children (and particularly those with multiple rfs) may lead to improved access and health for these vulnerable children.

the use of anthropometric measures (eg, skinfold thicknesses, bmi) to assess obesity is not without controversy and has not been explored with respect to the use among groups of children with growth retardation (ie, stunting). therefore, the objective of this study was to determine whether growth retardation affects the accuracy of field methods for assessing body composition in children. a cross-sectional study was conducted in 30 stunted children and 30 nonstunted children who were matched for age- and weight-for-height z score and living in the shantytowns of são paulo, brazil. body composition (fat mass, fat-free mass, and percentage of body fat [%bf]) was measured by h2(18)o dilution (reference technique) using group-specific values for the hydration of fat-free mass and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. bmi and body composition that were calculated from 3 pediatric skinfold prediction equations were evaluated for accuracy of %bf in comparison with the reference technique. stunted children were shorter and weighed less than nonstunted children, but bmi did not differ significantly between groups. all 3 skinfold equations tested resulted in a calculated %bf that was significantly lower than that measured by h2(18)o dilution for both stunted and nonstunted groups, and %bf as calculated by any of the skinfold equations tested did not significantly predict %bf by h2(18)o dilution. in contrast, bmi significantly predicted %bf in both stunted and nonstunted children, and this relationship did not differ by growth status. bmi but not skinfolds significantly predicted %bf measured by h2(18)o dilution. the relationship between bmi and %bf did not differ between stunted and nonstunted children; this indicates that bmi can be used in field studies of obesity and stunting. however, the prediction of %bf by bmi is relatively poor in both groups of children, and continued investigation of more accurate field methods for measuring %bf is warranted.

familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (fhlh) is a genetically determined disorder characterized by the early onset of fever, hepatosplenomegaly, central nervous system disease, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders, and hemophagocytosis. it is caused by genetic defects that impair t cell-mediated and natural cytotoxicity. chemotherapy- or immunotherapy-based treatments can achieve remission. hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hsct), however, is the only curative option, but optimal modalities and long-term outcome are not yet well known. we retrospectively analyzed the outcome of hsct that was performed in 48 consecutive patients who had fhlh and were treated in a single center between 1982 and 2004. the overall survival was 58.5% with a median follow-up of 5.8 years and extending to 20 years. a combination of active disease and haploidentical hsct had a poor prognosis because in this situation, hlh disease is more frequently associated with graft failure. twelve patients received 2 transplants because of graft failure (n = 7) or secondary graft loss that led to hlh relapse (n = 5). transplant-related toxicity essentially consisted in veno-occlusive disease, which occurred in 28% of transplants and was associated with young age, haploidentical transplantation, and the use of antithymocyte globulin (atg) in the conditioning regimen. a sustained remission was achieved in all patients with a donor chimerism > or = 20% of leukocytes. long-term sequelae were limited, because only 2 (7%) of 28 patients experienced a mild neurologic disorder. this survey demonstrates the long-term efficacy of hsct as a cure of fhlh. hsct preserves quality of life. it shows that hsct should be performed as early as a complete remission has been achieved. additional studies are required to improve the procedure and reduce its toxic effects.

children with moderate to severe traumatic brain injury (tbi) show early neurobehavioral deficits that can persist several years after injury. despite the negative impact that tbi can have on a child's physical, cognitive, and psychosocial well-being, only 1 study to date has documented the receipt of health care services after acute care and the needs of children after tbi. the purpose of this study was to document the health care use and needs of children after a tbi and to identify factors that are associated with unmet or unrecognized health care needs during the first year after injury. the health care use and needs of children who sustained a tbi were obtained via telephone interview with a primary caregiver at 2 and 12 months after injury. of the 330 who enrolled in the study, 302 (92%) completed the 3-month and 288 (87%) completed the 12-month follow-up interviews. the health care needs of each child were categorized as no need, met need, unmet need, or unrecognized need on the basis of the child's use of post-acute services, the caregiver's report of unmet need, and the caregiver's report of the child's functioning as measured by the pediatric quality of life inventory (pedsql). regardless of the use of services or level of function, children of caregivers who reported an unmet need for a health care service were defined as having unmet need. children who were categorized as having no needs were defined as those who did not receive services; whose caregiver did not report unmet need for a service; and the whose physical, socioemotional, and cognitive functioning was reported to be normal by the caregiver. children with met needs were those who used services in a particular domain and whose caregivers did not report need for additional services. finally, children with unrecognized needs were those whose caregiver reported cognitive, physical, or socioemotional dysfunction; who were not receiving services to address the dysfunction; and whose caregiver did not report unmet need for services. polytomous logistic regression was used to model unmet and unrecognized need at 3 and 12 months after injury as a function of child, family, and injury characteristics. at 3 months after injury, 62% of the study sample reported receiving at least 1 outpatient health care service. most frequently, children visited a doctor (56%) or a physical therapist (27%); however, 37% of caregivers reported that their child did not see a physician at all during the first year after injury. at 3 and 12 months after injury, 26% and 31% of children, respectively, had unmet/unrecognized health care needs. the most frequent type of unmet or unrecognized need was for cognitive services. the top 3 reasons for unmet need at 3 and 12 months were (1) not recommended by doctor (34% and 31%); (2) not recommended/provided by school (16% and 17%); and (3) cost too much (16% and 16%). factors that were associated with unmet or unrecognized need changed over time. at 3 months after injury, the caregivers of children with a preexisting psychosocial condition were 3 times more likely to report unmet need compared with children who did not have one. also, female caregivers were significantly more likely to report unmet need compared with male caregivers. finally, the caregivers of children with medicaid were almost 2 times more likely to report unmet need compared with children who were covered by commercial insurance. the only factor that was associated with unrecognized need at 3 months after injury was abnormal family functioning. at 12 months after injury, although tbi severity was not significant, children who sustained a major associated injury were 2 times more likely to report unmet need compared with children who did not. consistent with the 3-month results, the caregivers of children with medicaid were significantly more likely to report unmet needs at 1 year after injury. in addition to poor family functioning's being associated with unrecognized need, nonwhite children were significantly more likely to have unrecognized needs at 1 year compared with white children. a substantial proportion of children with tbi had unmet or unrecognized health care needs during the first year after injury. it is recommended that pediatricians be involved in the post-acute care follow-up of children with tbi to ensure that the injured child's needs are being addressed in a timely and appropriate manner. one of the recommendations that trauma center providers should make on hospital discharge is that the parent/primary caregiver schedule a visit with the child's pediatrician regardless of the post-acute services that the child may be receiving. because unmet and unrecognized need was highest for cognitive services, it is important to screen for cognitive dysfunction in the primary care setting. finally, because the health care needs of children with tbi change over time, it is important for pediatricians to monitor their recovery to ensure that children with tbi receive the services that they need to restore their health after injury.

the physiologic responses to chloral hydrate sedation in the setting of a pediatric echocardiography laboratory have not been well documented; neither has the population at risk been identified adequately. the purpose of this study was to describe the physiologic responses to chloral hydrate sedation, to report the occurrence of adverse events, and to identify any risk factors that predicted these adverse events in children who underwent sedation for echocardiography at our institution. we analyzed retrospectively 1095 patients who were sedated for echocardiography. vital signs and oxygen saturations were recorded every 5 minutes, and adverse events were noted. potential risk factors for sedation-related adverse events were analyzed. thirty-eight percent of patients were classified as american society of anesthesiologists class 3 or 4, reflecting the significant comorbidity in the study population. hemodynamic responses to chloral hydrate sedation included > or = 20% decreases in heart rate (24% of the patients) and blood pressure (59% of the patients). there were no deaths or permanent morbidity. adverse events occurred in 10.8% of patients and included apnea (n = 3 [0.3%]), airway obstruction (n = 15 [1.4%]), hypoxia (n = 65 [5.9%]), hypercarbia (n = 40 of 603 [6.6%]), hypotension with poor perfusion (n = 4 [0.4%]), vomiting (n = 4 [0.4%]), and prolonged sedation (n = 36 [3.3%]). no intervention was required in 92.5%, minor interventions were necessary in 7%, and major interventions were required in 0.5% of all patients. multivariate analysis identified only age younger than 6 months as a predictor for adverse events, whereas cyanosis, hospitalization, american society of anesthesiologists class, fasting time, oxygen requirement, and use of additional sedation were not predictors. moderate decreases in heart rate and blood pressure, in the absence of clinical deterioration, are expected responses to chloral hydrate sedation in this pediatric population. the majority of adverse events were minor, and major events were uncommon. infants who were younger than 6 months were found to be at higher risk for serious adverse events.

this statement revises a previous statement on screening of preterm infants for retinopathy of prematurity (rop) that was published in 2001. rop is a pathologic process that occurs only in immature retinal tissue and can progress to a tractional retinal detachment, which can result in functional or complete blindness. recent development of peripheral retinal ablative therapy using laser photocoagulation has resulted in the possibility of markedly decreasing the incidence of this poor visual outcome, but the sequential nature of rop creates a requirement that at-risk preterm infants be examined at proper times to detect the changes of rop before they become permanently destructive. this statement presents the attributes on which an effective program for detecting and treating rop could be based, including the timing of initial examination and subsequent reexamination intervals.

we sought to (1) evaluate at 2 years the postsurfactant era developmental outcome of children who were born before 33 weeks of gestational age (ga) in the nord-pas-de-calais area in france in 1997 and (2) identify risk factors of poor developmental quotient (dq). children were part of the epipage study, which included all of these births in 9 french regions. a prospective observational study was conducted of all births before 33 weeks in 1997. risk factors of poor dq were obtained from a multiple linear regression, and results were expressed as dq differences with 95% confidence intervals. a total of 546 births were included in the study. a total of 461 (84.4%) had a clinical evaluation at 2 years of age, and 380 (69.6%) had an assessment with the use of the brunet-lezine scale of infant development. their mean ga was 29.9 weeks (29.7-30.1 weeks), and mean birth weight was 1378 g (1338-1418 g). a total of 9% had a recognizable pattern of cerebral palsy, 0.2% were blind, and 0.8% required hearing aids. the mean dq was 94 +/- 11 and decreased from 97 at 32 weeks to 86 at 24 to 25 weeks. after multivariate analysis, children who were born at 24 to 25 weeks had a mean dq reduction of 11 points (-20 to -1) compared with those who were born at 32 weeks, but minor differences were found from 26 to 32 weeks. boys had a dq 4 points lower than girls (-7 to -1). in this study, the outcome of extremely preterm infants was poor. after 25 weeks, outcome was related mainly to the sociocultural level of the family and to the presence of severe cerebral ultrasound abnormalities. consequently, in the postsurfactant era, we have to propose follow-up programs to children who are born extremely preterm and to concentrate our efforts on children with less-than-optimal social and family setting.

very preterm birth (vpt; <33 weeks' gestation) is associated with later neuromotor and cognitive impairment, reduced school performance, and psychiatric morbidity. several follow-up studies have demonstrated increased anxiety and social rejection and reduced self-esteem in preterm children and adolescents, but few studies have examined the effects of preterm birth on adult personality. we assessed 108 vpt individuals and 67 term-born controls at ages 18 to 19 years with the eysenck personality questionnaire-revised, short form (epq-rs). this questionnaire rates 3 dimensions of personality: extraversion (sociability, liveliness, sensation seeking); neuroticism (anxiety, low mood, low self-esteem); and psychoticism (coldness, aggression, predisposition to antisocial behavior). a fourth scale, "lie," which measures dissimulation, is also derived. vpt individuals had significantly lower extraversion scores, higher neuroticism scores, and higher lie scores than term-born controls, after controlling for age at assessment and socioeconomic status. p scores were not significantly different between the 2 groups. there was a gender difference in that the increased neuroticism and decreased extraversion scores were accounted for mainly by vpt females. associations between epq-rs scores and neonatal status, adolescent behavioral ratings, and body size at 18 to 19 years were assessed by using kendall partial correlations, correcting for age at assessment and socioeconomic status. gestational age, indices of neonatal hypoxia, and neonatal ultrasound ratings were not correlated with epq-rs scores. birth weight was weakly associated with increased lie scores. rutter parents' scale score, a measure of adolescent psychopathology, was associated with an increased neuroticism score. poor social adjustment in adolescence was associated with an increased lie score. height and weight at 18 to 19 years were not associated with epq-rs, but reduced occipitofrontal circumference was associated with both decreased extraversion and increased lie scores. young adults who are born vpt have different personality styles from their term-born peers. this may be associated with an increased risk of psychiatric difficulties.

the confluence of sleep/wake cycle and circadian rhythm changes that accompany pubertal development and the social and emotional developmental tasks of adolescence may create a period of substantial risk for development of insomnia. although poor sleep affects cognitive performance and is associated with poor emotional and physical health, epidemiologic studies among adolescents have been limited. in this first epidemiologic study of insomnia defined by diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, fourth edition (dsm-iv) criteria in a us sample of adolescents, we estimated lifetime prevalence of insomnia, examined chronicity and onset, and explored the role of pubertal development. data come from a random sample of 1014 adolescents who were 13 to 16 years of age, selected from households in a 400000-member health maintenance organization encompassing metropolitan detroit. response rate was 71.2%. the main outcome measured was dsm-iv-defined insomnia. lifetime prevalence of insomnia was 10.7%. a total of 88% of adolescents with a history of insomnia reported current insomnia. the median age of onset of insomnia was 11. of those with insomnia, 52.8% had a comorbid psychiatric disorder. in exploratory analyses of insomnia and pubertal development, onset of menses was associated with a 2.75-fold increased risk for insomnia. there was no difference in risk for insomnia among girls before menses onset relative to boys, but a difference emerged after menses onset. in contrast, maturational development was not associated with insomnia in boys. insomnia seems to be common and chronic among adolescents. the often found gender difference in risk for insomnia seems to emerge in association with onset of menses.

children with chronic abdominal pain of nonorganic origin, termed functional abdominal pain (fap), experience school absences and social withdrawal and report impaired physical ability. the aim of this study was to assess patients' and parents' perceptions of health-related quality of life (qol) for children with fap. between october 2002 and november 2003, 209 children (including 125 girls; age: 11.2 +/- 3.5 years) and 209 parents were recruited from a pediatric referral center. at the time of their initial evaluations, participants completed a validated, health-related qol instrument (pediatric quality of life inventory), which was scored on a scale of 0 (poor) through 100 (best). children with fap (n = 65) and their families were compared with control groups of healthy children (n = 46) and children with histologically proven inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) (n = 42) or gastroesophageal reflux disease (gerd) (n = 56). children with fap had self-reported qol scores (score: 78) that were similar to those for children with gerd (score: 80) or ibd (score: 84). children with fap had lower qol scores than did healthy children (score: 88). parents of children with fap reported lower qol scores, compared with their children's scores (scores: 70 vs 78). children with fap reported lower qol, compared with their healthy peers, and had the same qol scores as did children with ibd or gerd. parents' perceptions of qol for children with fap were lower than their children's self-reported scores. these findings highlight the clinical significance of fap and may provide insight into one facet of the disease's biopsychosocial etiology.

early diagnosis of children with autism spectrum disorders (asd) is critical but often delayed until school age. few studies have identified factors that may delay diagnosis. this study attempted to identify these factors among a community sample of children with asd. survey data were collected in pennsylvania from 969 caregivers of children who had asd and were younger than 21 years regarding their service experiences. linear regression was used to identify clinical and demographic characteristics associated with age of diagnosis. the average age of diagnosis was 3.1 years for children with autistic disorder, 3.9 years for pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, and 7.2 years for asperger's disorder. the average age of diagnosis increased 0.2 years for each year of age. rural children received a diagnosis 0.4 years later than urban children. near-poor children received a diagnosis 0.9 years later than those with incomes >100% above the poverty level. children with severe language deficits received a diagnosis an average of 1.2 years earlier than other children. hand flapping, toe walking, and sustained odd play were associated with a decrease in the age of diagnosis, whereas oversensitivity to pain and hearing impairment were associated with an increase. children who had 4 or more primary care physicians before diagnosis received a diagnosis 0.5 years later than other children, whereas those whose pediatricians referred them to a specialist received a diagnosis 0.3 years sooner. these findings suggest improvements over time in decreasing the age at which children with asd, especially higher functioning children, receive a diagnosis. they also suggest a lack of resources in rural areas and for near-poor families and the importance of continuous pediatric care and specialty referrals. that only certain asd-related behaviors, some of which are not required to satisfy diagnostic criteria, decreased the age of diagnosis suggests the importance of continued physician education.

to identify variations in standards of neonatal care in the first week of life that might have contributed to deaths in infants who were born at 27 and 28 weeks' gestation. a case-control study was conducted of infants who were born at 27 and 28 weeks' gestation in england, wales, and northern ireland during a 2-year period. cases were neonatal deaths; control subjects were randomly selected survivors at day 28. main outcome measures were failures of prespecified standards of care or deficiencies in care reported by regional panels assessing anonymized medical records. failures of standards of care relating to ventilatory support (adjusted odds ratio [or]: 3.29; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.97-5.49), cardiovascular support (or: 2.37; 95% ci :1.36-4.13), and thermal care (or: 1.71; 95% ci: 1.21-2.43) were associated with neonatal death. frequencies of unmet resuscitation standards (range: 3%-46%) and of delays in surfactant administration (range: 38%-40%) were similar in cases and control subjects. panels identified significantly more deficiencies in all aspects of neonatal care in cases with the exception of the management of infection. stratification by clinical condition of infants at birth showed a stronger association between overall standard of care and death when infants were in a good condition at birth. our findings suggest an association between quality of neonatal care and neonatal deaths, most marked for early thermal care and ventilatory and cardiovascular support. poor overall quality of care was more strongly associated with deaths when the infant was in a good condition at birth.

the goal of this study was to determine whether multisystemic therapy (mst), an intensive, home-based psychotherapy, could decrease diabetes-related stress among adolescents with chronically poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. stress was also evaluated as a mediator of the effect of mst on adherence and metabolic control. a randomized, controlled trial was conducted with 127 adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus and chronically poor metabolic control (hemoglobin a1c levels of > or =8% at study enrollment and for the past 1 year) who received their diabetes care in a children's hospital located in a major midwestern city. participants assigned randomly to mst received treatment for approximately 6 months. data were collected at baseline and at a 7-month posttest (ie, treatment termination). changes in diabetes-related stress, as measured with a self-report questionnaire, were assessed. structural equation models were used to test the degree to which changes in stress levels mediated the ability of the mst intervention to improve adherence and metabolic control. in intent-to-treat analyses, participation in mst was associated with significant reductions in diabetes-related stress. tests for moderation found no significant effects of age, gender, or ethnicity, which suggests that the intervention was equally effective in reducing diabetes stress for all participants. however, structural equation modeling did not provide support for diabetes stress as the mechanism through which mst improved health outcomes. rather, the final model suggested that mst improved metabolic control through increased regimen adherence. intensive, home-based psychotherapy reduces diabetes-related stress among adolescents with chronically poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. such stress reductions are important for the psychological wellbeing of a subset of youths with diabetes who are at high risk for future health complications.

standard treatment of central precocious puberty (cpp) consists of intramuscular or subcutaneous administration of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (gnrh) agonist (gnrha) at 3- to 4-week intervals. although generally effective in suppressing clinical and laboratory parameters of puberty, gnrha injections are painful, and the need for monthly clinic visits may contribute to poor compliance. recently, a subcutaneous implant was developed that releases the gnrha histrelin at an average rate of 65 microg/day. the aims of this study were to determine if a histrelin implant would suppress gonadotropin and estradiol (e2) in girls with cpp for 1 year and to compare the suppression to standard treatment. we studied 11 girls with cpp to determine if the histrelin implant can maintain long-term gonadotropin suppression. mean age at diagnosis was 6 years (range: 2-9 years). gnrh (100 microg intravenously) stimulation tests (gnrh-sts) showed peak luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone responses of 23 +/- 28 (mean +/- sd) and 20 +/- 25 miu/ml, respectively. all subjects were initially treated with depot intramuscular gnrha triptorelin embonate. implants were inserted subcutaneously under local anesthesia, and depot gnrha treatment was discontinued. six girls were followed for 15 months after insertion (group a). for the remaining 5 girls, the implant was removed after 9 months, and a new implant was inserted at the same incision site (group b). gnrh-sts were performed before depot gnrha treatment, immediately before implant insertion, at the 6- and 9-month visits for each patient and the 12- and 15-month visit for those girls followed for 15 months. in all girls, breast development regressed, growth velocity decreased, and bone-age advancement was slowed. basal gonadotropins and their responses to gnrh-sts and e2 levels were suppressed. peak luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone responses to gnrh-sts at preinsertion versus 9 months were 1.30 +/- 1.34 vs 0.25 +/- 0.08 and 1.68 +/- 1.08 vs 1.13 +/- 0.55 miu/ml, respectively. basal and stimulated gonadotropin levels and e2 level remained suppressed in all 6 patients followed for 15 months after implant insertion. patients and parents reported less pain and discomfort and less interference with school activity and work with the implant compared with standard monthly injections. the histrelin implant consistently suppresses clinical and laboratory parameters of puberty for 1 year and is a promising new technique for treating cpp without the pain and inconvenience of monthly injections.

failure to thrive is a common problem in infancy and childhood. it is most often multifactorial in origin. inadequate nutrition and disturbed social interactions contribute to poor weight gain, delayed development, and abnormal behavior. the syndrome develops in a significant number of children as a consequence of child neglect. this clinical report is intended to focus the pediatrician on the consideration, evaluation, and management of failure to thrive when child neglect may be present. child protective services agencies should be notified when the evaluation leads to a suspicion of abuse or neglect.

we sought to determine the long-term clinical and biochemical outcome of newborns with mitochondrial cytopathies (mcs) and to identify possible prognostic factors that may modify the course of these diseases. fifty-seven newborns with mcs were identified in a retrospective review (1983-2002). we defined 2 different outcome categories: clinical (neurologic, hepatic, myopathic, and multiorganic) and biochemical (lactate level normalization or initially normal remaining unchanged, decreased but not normalized, and persistently high). we used 2 different statistical approaches: (1) survival studies depending on the initial symptoms and lactate and enzymatic deficiencies using the kaplan-meier method; and (2) the same variables compared with different survival age groups and clinical and biochemical outcome categories using the chi2 test. thirty-three patients died (57.8%), 12 remain alive (21%), and 12 were lost in the follow-up; 6 of them are currently older than 4 years. most of the patients manifested multiorganic disease (64.8%) and high lactate level (77.1%) over time. children surviving to 2.5 to 3 years of age were more likely to survive for a long period of time. initial neurologic and hepatic presentation increased the risk to develop neurologic disease and severe persistent hyperlactacidemia, respectively. initial severe hyperlactacidemia and combined enzyme deficiencies were significant risk factors for higher mortality and multiorganic disorders. two patients with exclusively myopathic outcome are alive and cognitively normal at 12 years of life. children with neonatal-onset mcs have very high mortality and poor prospects. however, some with life-threatening presentations may gradually improve, giving rise to less severe diseases. those with exclusively myopathic symptoms have a better prognosis.

to quantify the number of children who experience gaps in insurance coverage and to determine whether vulnerable subgroups of children experience noteworthy lapses in insurance coverage. we analyzed nationally representative data from 24,149 children sampled in the 1999-2001 medical expenditure panel survey linked to the 1997-1999 national health interview survey. vulnerable subgroups of children included children with chronic conditions, those from ethnic/racial minorities, and those living in poverty. on the basis of cumulative annual monthly insurance coverage status, each child fell into 1 of 3 groups: continuous coverage, uninsured, or gaps in coverage. using sas-callable sudaan, we conducted multivariate ordinal logistic regression model to quantify the likelihood of having gaps in coverage for vulnerable subgroups of children. from 1999 to 2001, we found that >9 million american children annually had gaps in coverage and that 5 to 6 million children annually were uninsured for the entire year. sixty percent of children experienced gaps of at least 4 months, and >40% of all publicly and privately insured children had coverage gaps. after accounting for relevant covariates, children with chronic conditions were just as likely as other children to have gaps in coverage or be uninsured; hispanic children were most likely to have insurance gaps or be uninsured; and children from poor and near-poor families were 4 to 5 times more likely to have lapsed coverage than children from high-income families. poverty and maternal education were the strongest factors associated with lapsed coverage. unstable health insurance is an underrecognized problem for children, including those with chronic conditions. because unstable insurance coverage can lead to inadequate health care utilization and poor child health outcomes, strategies to promote stable insurance coverage merit serious consideration.

hypoglycemia is a common determining factor of poor prognosis for children with severe malaria in sub-saharan africa. intravenous dextrose administration is rarely available. oral mucosal delivery may be an alternative to parenteral administration. a randomized, clinical trial was performed in burkina faso among moderately hypoglycemic children, comparing sublingual sugar administration with oral water, oral sugar, and dextrose infusion administrations. sixty-nine children with glucose concentrations of < 0.8 g/l were assigned randomly to 1 of 4 methods of administration, 1 with 3 different doses of sugar, as follows: oral group (og) (n = 15): 2.5 g of sugar; sublingual group (sg) (n = 27): 2.5 g of sugar under the tongue, with 3 treatment subgroups, ie, 0.1 g/kg, 0.15 g/kg, and 0.2 g/kg; intravenous group (ig) (n = 8): 8 ml of 30% dextrose in a single bolus; water group (n = 11). eight children received sublingual sugar twice, ie, 0.1 g/kg at baseline and 20 minutes later. blood glucose concentrations were measured every 20 minutes for 80 minutes. treatment failures, peak glucose concentrations, times to glucose concentration normalization, and kinetic profiles were evaluated. no treatment failures were observed in the sg and ig, compared with 8 (53%) and 9 (81.8%) failures in the og and water group, respectively. sg children exhibited glucose kinetic profiles and bioavailabilities (77%, 99%, and 81% in the 3 sg groups) similar to those of ig children. bioavailabilities were 84% and 38% in the sg and og, respectively. children > 7 years of age required repeated sublingual administrations to maintain normoglycemia. the sublingual administration of sugar proved to be effective among moderately hypoglycemic children. it is a simple and promising method to control hypoglycemia among children in both developing and developed countries. this pediatric practice should be investigated in more detail among children with severe malaria.

a total of 196,000 hospitalizations occur each year among the 9 million us children who have been diagnosed with asthma. not enough is known about how to prevent pediatric asthma hospitalizations. to identify the proportion of preventable pediatric asthma hospitalizations and how such hospitalizations might be prevented, according to parents and physicians of hospitalized children with asthma. a cross-sectional survey was conducted of parents, primary care physicians (pcps), and inpatient attending physicians (iaps) of a consecutive series of all children who were admitted for asthma to an urban hospital in a 14-month period. the 230 hospitalized children had a median age of 5 years; most were poor (median annual family income: 13,356 dollars), were nonwhite (93%), and had public (74%) or no (14%) health insurance. compared with children who were hospitalized for other ambulatory care-sensitive conditions, hospitalized children with asthma were significantly more likely to be african american (70% vs 57%), to be older, and not to have made a physician visit or telephone contact before admission (52% vs 41%). only 26% of parents said that their child's admission was preventable, compared with 38% of pcps and 43% of iaps. the proportion of asthma hospitalizations that were assessed as preventable varied according to the source or combination of sources, from 15% for agreement among all 3 sources to 54% as identified by any 1 of the 3 sources. pcps (83%) and iaps (67%) significantly more often than parents (44%) cited parent/patient-related reasons for how hospitalizations could have been prevented, including adhering to and refilling medications, better outpatient follow-up, and avoiding known disease triggers. parents (27%) and iaps (26%) significantly more often than pcps (11%) cited physician-related reasons for how hospitalizations could have been avoided, including better education by physicians about the child's condition, and better quality of care. multivariate analyses revealed that an age > or =11 years and no physician contact before the hospitalization were associated with approximately 2 times the odds of a preventable asthma hospitalization. the proportion of asthma hospitalizations assessed as preventable varies from 15% to 54%, depending on the source. adolescents and families who fail to contact physicians before hospitalization are at greatest risk for preventable hospitalizations. many pediatric asthma hospitalizations might be prevented if parents and children were better educated about the child's condition, medications, the need for follow-up care, and the importance of avoiding known disease triggers.

children with sickle cell disease (scd) experience poor growth, altered body composition, and delayed maturation. deficits in bone mineral content (bmc) and bone area (ba) have not been well characterized. the objectives of this study were to assess whole-body bmc (wbbmc) and wbba in children with scd, type ss (scd-ss), compared with healthy control subjects, adjusted for growth and body composition, and to determine the relationships of wbbmc and wbba to bone age and hematologic parameters in children with scd-ss. wbbmc, wbba, and lean mass were measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry in children who were aged 4 to 19 years. growth, sexual development, and bone age were assessed. gender-specific z scores for wbbmc relative to age and height were generated from control data. ninety children with scd-ss and 198 healthy control subjects were evaluated. scd-ss was associated with poor growth. wbbmc was significantly decreased in scd-ss compared with control subjects, adjusted for age, height, pubertal status, and lean mass. wbbmc relative to age and wbbmc relative to height z scores were -0.95 +/- 0.99 and -0.54 +/- 0.97, respectively, and were associated with hemoglobin and hematocrit levels and history of delayed bone age. children with scd-ss have significant deficits in wbbmc that persist despite adjustment for poor growth and decreased lean mass. these children may be at increased risk for fragility fractures and suboptimal peak bone mass.

the born-alive infants protection act (baipa), passed by congress in 2002, has attracted little publicity. its purposes were, in part, "to repudiate the flawed notion that a child's entitlement to the protections of the law is dependent on whether that child's mother or others want him or her." understood as antiabortion rhetoric, the bill raised little concern among physicians at the time of legislative hearings and passed in both houses by overwhelming majorities, hardly suggesting contentious legislation. after its signing into law, the neonatal resuscitation program (nrp) steering committee issued an opinion stating that "[baipa] should not in any way affect the approach that physicians currently follow with respect to the extremely premature infant." this interpretation of the law, however, may have been short sighted. in april 2005, the us department of health and human services (dhhs) brought life to the baipa, announcing: "as a matter of law and policy, [dhhs] will investigate all circumstances where individuals and entities are reported to be withholding medical care from an infant born alive in potential violation of federal statutes." the agency issued instructions to state officials on how the definitional provision within the baipa interacts with the emergency medical treatment and labor act (emtala) and the child abuse prevention and treatment act (capta). these interagency memoranda potentially resurrect dormant governmental oversight of newborn-treatment decisions and thus may have influence over normative neonatal practice. under the baipa, the dhhs interprets emtala to protect all "born-alive" infants; hospitals and physicians violating regulatory requirements face agency-sanctioned monetary penalties or a "private right of action by any individual harmed as a direct result." according to its memorandum, the dhhs will investigate allegations of emtala violations whenever it finds evidence that a newborn was not provided with at least a medical screening examination under circumstances in which a "prudent layperson observer" could conclude from the infant's "appearance or behavior" that it was "suffering from an emergency medical condition." the memorandum fails to clarify which observers qualify as prudent, what infant appearance or behavior is relevant, or what defines an emergency medical condition. because these evaluative criteria are not constrained by reference to relevant standards of medical care, the agency arguably substitutes a nonprofessional's presumed sagacious assessment of survivability for reasonable medical judgment. indeed, under a straightforward reading of the instruction, a family member could conceivably trigger an investigation after observing a relative deliver a 20-week fetus who maintains a heartbeat for an hour before its death. most physicians would not consider this an emergency medical condition and, rather than perform a screening examination, would provide comfort for the newborn and support for the family. the guideline, however, does not state that professional acumen trumps the layperson's observations in these instances; thus, physicians are left unclear about whether screening examinations are required for all newborns regardless of a priori, reasoned considerations of survivability. in this context, the nrp steering committee opinion states that "at the time of delivery... the medical condition and prognosis of the newly born infant should be assessed. at that point decisions about withholding or discontinuing medical treatment that is considered futile may be considered by... providers in conjunction with the parents acting in the best interest of their child." however, most pediatricians skilled in screening and resuscitation are not currently called on to perform this function when the gestational age of a nonviable fetus is reasonably certain before delivery. if under the law screening is now required at any gestational age, professional procedure immediately after previable births may need modification. more worrisome, threatened aggressive investigations of alleged emtala violations at the soft edges of viability, where futility remains a matter of debate, jeopardize the normative ethical practice of offering discretionary palliative care. the dhhs sent its other instruction to state child protective services agencies responsible for implementing capta regulations; it reiterates the limited situations in which physicians may withhold medical treatment from infants and reemphasizes the local role of "individuals within health care facilities" to notify authorities of suspected infractions. its real import, however, is insistence on local execution of legal remedies to prevent nontreatment decisions deemed impermissible by the 1984 baby doe rules. because this new directive encourages governmental oversight of treatment decisions involving imperiled newborns, a period of benign regulatory neglect seems to be over. the federal capta rules arguably remove quality-of-life considerations from the decision-making calculus and therefore may conflict with the best-interests paradigm advocated by the american academy of pediatrics and nrp. how courts will respond to the dhhs interpretation of emtala and capta under the baipa remains unclear. federal courts have yet to authoritatively examine alleged emtala violations involving newborn treatment decisions at the limits of viability. the wisconsin supreme court has permitted an emtala claim to go to trial where physicians allegedly did not screen or resuscitate a 22-week newborn delivered in an emergency department, and a lower appellate court has relied on capta to hold that parents do not possess the right to choose against resuscitating an extremely premature newborn. the texas supreme court recently granted physicians the paternalistic prerogative to resuscitate imperiled newborns without attention to parental preference under a common law doctrine of "emergent circumstances." these judicial decisions undermine the ethical discretion parents are typically afforded in decision-making before and after delivery in these morally complex situations. the dhhs interpretation of the baipa may encourage jurisdictional creep of these kinds of pronouncements as the agency seeks to expand legal protections for born-alive infants. the us supreme court has stated that "courts must presume that a legislature says in a statute what it means and means in a statute what it says there"; thus, judges interpret law by analyzing "concrete statutory language, not by reference to abstract notions of generalized legislative intent." the baipa indiscriminately defines "born alive" to include an infant "at any stage of development... regardless of whether the expulsion or extraction occurs as a result of natural or induced labor, cesarean section, or induced abortion," and it makes no reference to standards of care or best interests, nor does it specifically protect a parent's decision-making authority. under the law's strict logic, an 18-week miscarried fetus with a detectable heart beat after delivery is entitled to the full protections of the law as determined by "any act of congress, or any ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the various administrative bureaus and agencies." before concluding that the baipa would not affect normative neonatal practice, the nrp steering committee should have analyzed the act's actual statutory language and avoided relying heavily on imprecise legislative intent. the baipa's congressional sponsors did claim that the law "will not mandate medical treatment where none is currently indicated," but such political rhetoric is often not sufficient to render law innocuous years after separation from its legislative history. besides, nowhere in the house record does the majority explicitly acknowledge that discretion to decide the fate of imperiled newborns invests in parents, in consultation with physicians; indeed, the bill's stated purpose was to repudiate that notion. at best, legislators recognized that physicians disagree about the efficacy of resuscitating at the limits of viability, and therefore the current standard of care permits doctors to deem resuscitation a futile endeavor. however, judges may resist characterizing resuscitation as futile, given its poor analytical fit, and substantial public-policy concerns regarding discrimination against future disabled individuals could easily tip a court to preserve incipient, at least, physiologic life under the baipa's all-encompassing definition of born alive.

there are limited data relating folate nutritional status of mothers during pregnancy to mental and psychomotor development of their offspring. using an existing data set from a study on the effect of prenatal zinc supplementation on child neurodevelopment, we evaluated the association between folate nutritional status of mothers during pregnancy and neurodevelopment of their children. maternal blood folate and total homocysteine (thcy) concentrations were measured at 19, 26, and 37 weeks of gestation. at a mean of 5.3 years of age, 355 black children with low-socioeconomic background were given 6 tests: differential ability scales, visual and auditory sequential memory, knox cube test, gross motor scale, and grooved pegboard. the scores of the tests between the 2 groups of mothers with poor versus adequate folate nutritional status classified by blood folate or thcy concentrations were compared. there were no differences in the test scores of neurodevelopment between the 2 groups. folate nutritional status of mothers in the later half of pregnancy assessed by plasma and erythrocyte folate and plasma thcy concentrations had no impact on neurodevelopment of their children at age 5. it is unknown whether our findings in a low-socioeconomic population can be readily extrapolated to other populations.

little is known about the characteristics of children with special health care needs (cshcn) who have unmet dental care needs. we sought to describe the magnitude of unmet needs for dental care among cshcn and to characterize those with unmet dental care needs. we used data from the national survey of children with special health care needs, which used a telephone survey to identify 750 cshcn from each of the 50 states and the district of columbia. families of 38,866 cshcn were interviewed, and the data were weighted to represent 9.32 million cshcn nationally. our primary outcome of interest was unmet dental care need, defined as whether cshcn were said to have needed dental care but were unable to obtain it. we also considered reasons why a child had an unmet dental care need and compared other categories of health care service needs and unmet needs with dental care. bivariate and multivariate analyses were conducted to determine factors associated with unmet dental care needs. overall, 78% of cshcn were reported as needing dental care in the past 12 months, which was second only to prescription medications in the frequency of need. of those who reported a dental care need, an estimated 755,581 or 10.4% of cshcn did not receive all of the dental care they needed. relative to all other health care service categories, unmet dental care needs affected the most children. poorer children, uninsured children, children with lapses in insurance, and children with greater limitations attributable to disability had significantly greater odds of unmet dental care needs in multivariate analyses. children with a personal doctor or nurse were significantly less likely to have unmet dental care needs. dental care is the most prevalent unmet health care need for cshcn, affecting substantially more children than any other health care need category. moreover, the perceived need for dental care for cshcn exceeds the need for either preventive or specialty medical care. given these findings, dental care should be an integral and explicitly stated part of the comprehensive coordinated services that the medical home aims to provide for cshcn. greater efforts to improve access to dental care for poor and more disabled cshcn are needed.

to examine the utility of red blood cell (rbc) zinc protoporphyrin/heme ratio (znpp/h) as an indicator of fetal iron status, because unfavorable neurodevelopmental outcomes have been associated with poor iron status at birth, as indicated by low serum ferritin, and because few reliable indicators of fetal and early neonatal iron status exist. consecutively studied preterm and term fetuses at delivery included the following groups: (1) control nonhypoxic, (2) fetuses with intrauterine growth retardation (iugr), and (3) fetuses of insulin-treated mothers (fdm). we hypothesized (1) that rapid growth velocity associated with an accelerated erythropoiesis among normal fetuses will lead to reduced iron delivery to a rapidly expanding rbc mass and higher umbilical cord blood rbc znpp/h and (2) that fetuses that are exposed to pathologic hypoxemia will experience an additional increase in erythropoiesis and higher cord znpp/h. znpp/h was determined on saline-washed cord blood erythrocytes by hematofluorometry and was examined for its relationship with clinical factors and cord blood laboratory measurements indicative of tissue oxygenation (plasma erythropoietin [epo] and reticulocyte count) and iron status (plasma ferritin and erythrocyte indices). statistical testing included 1-way analysis of variance, 2-way analysis of variance with covariates, simple linear regression, and multiple regression analysis. among control group subjects, gestational age at birth was inversely correlated with rbc znpp/h and reticulocyte count and positively correlated with ferritin and epo. relative to control subjects, iugr and fdm fetuses at specified gestational age groupings had higher znpp/h, lower plasma ferritin, and higher plasma epo. statistical modeling of the relationship between znpp/h and plasma ferritin among all study groups demonstrated significant impacts of gestational age, plasma epo, maternal hypertension, and maternal smoking. the inverse association of fetal znpp/h with gestational age at birth among control subjects is attributable to erythropoietic stimulation likely as a result of increasing growth velocity at the earliest gestational ages. the relatively higher znpp/h observed among fetuses in the iugr and fdm groups likely is attributable to increased erythropoietic activity secondary to pathologic hypoxemia. decreased placental iron transfer may also have limited iron availability and contributed to elevated znpp/h in the iugr group. these data support the concept that increased erythropoietic activity and/or limited iron transport may place infants of diabetic mothers and infants with growth retardation at risk for developing systemic iron deficiency later in infancy and in early childhood.

to study the growth, health status, and respiratory outcomes at 13 to 17 years of infants enrolled in a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of dexamethasone for the treatment of neonatal chronic lung disease. a total of 287 infants who were chronically dependent on supplementary oxygen between 2 and 12 weeks of age were recruited from 31 centers in 6 countries to a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of dexamethasone base (0.5 mg/kg per day for 1 week) or placebo, and survivors were evaluated at 3 years. children from the 25 british and irish centers were traced for reassessment at 13 to 17 years of age. respiratory symptoms, lung-function testing, height, weight, head circumference, blood pressure, health resource usage, and school absences. there was no significant difference in respiratory outcomes between the dexamethasone and placebo groups. lung function was impaired but with no difference between the 2 groups. growth was also impaired in both groups, with height z score of -0.7, weight z score of -0.4, and head circumference z score of -1.1. systolic blood pressure was >95th percentile for age and height for 15% of children, but with no difference between the 2 groups. there was no difference in the numbers of hospital admissions for respiratory causes or other causes. despite a shorter duration of neonatal assisted ventilation, there is no evidence that dexamethasone use is associated with long-term improvement in lung function. impaired growth and poor health status are long-term consequences of neonatal chronic lung disease, irrespective of exposure to neonatal dexamethasone.

ten to 30% of students engage in bullying behavior. bullies stand out on account of increased anger, poor interpersonal relationships, and poor quality of life. our aim was to determine the effectiveness of outpatient family psychotherapy as a monotherapy for anger reduction and improvement of behavior and interpersonal relationships and of health-related quality of life in male youths with bullying behavior. twenty-two boys with bullying behavior took part in a family therapy program for 6 months. the control group was also composed of 22 youths and took part in a placebo intervention program. every 2 weeks, results were checked with the adolescents risky-behavior scale (arbs), the state-trait anger expression inventory (staxi), the inventory of interpersonal problems (iip-d), and the sf-36 health survey (sf-36). follow-up testing took place 12 months after treatment. in comparison with the control group (according to the intention-to-treat principle), bullying behavior was reduced (family therapy group: from n = 22 to n = 6; control group: from n = 22 to n = 20). significant changes on all arbs scales and on the staxi scales state-anger, trait-anger, anger-out, and anger-control were observed after 6 months. in the iip-d, significant differences were found on the scales for overly autocratic, overly competitive, overly introverted, overly expressive, and exploitable/compliant. in the sf-36, significant differences were observed in general health perceptions, vitality, social functioning, role-emotional, and mental health. the reduction in expression of anger correlated with a reduction in several scales of the arbs, iip-d, and sf-36. follow-up after 1 year showed relatively stable, lasting treatment effects. the results of this study show that outpatient family therapy seems to be an effective method of reducing anger and improving interpersonal relationships and health-related quality of life in male youths with bullying behavior.

there is limited information regarding the long-term outcome of inflicted traumatic brain injury (tbi), including shaken infant syndrome. the purpose of this study was to describe the long-term neurologic, behavioral, and cognitive sequelae seen in this population. a cross-sectional and prospective longitudinal study was conducted of 25 children with inflicted tbi in scotland between 1980 and 1999. after consent was obtained, neurologic and cognitive examinations were performed on all participants and sequentially in the prospective cohort. two global outcome measures were used: glasgow outcome score (gos) and seshia's outcome score. cognitive outcome was assessed using the bayley scales of infant development, british ability scales, and the vineland adaptive behavior scales. the mean length of follow-up was 59 months. a total of 68% of survivors were abnormal on follow-up, 36% had severe difficulties and were totally dependant, 16% had moderate difficulties, and 16% had mild difficulties on follow-up. a wide range of neurologic sequelae were seen, including motor deficits (60%), visual deficits (48%), epilepsy (20%), speech and language abnormalities (64%), and behavioral problems (52%). there was a wide range of cognitive abilities: the mean psychomotor index, 69.9 (sd: +/-25.73); and mean mental development index, 74.53 (sd: +/-28.55). adaptive functioning showed a wide range of difficulties across all domains: communication domain (mean: 76.1; sd: +/-25.4), daily living skills domain (mean: 76.9; sd: +/-24.3), and socialization domain (mean: 79.1; sd: +/-23.1). outcome was found to correlate with the pediatric trauma score and the glasgow coma score but did not correlate with age at injury or mechanism of injury. inflicted tbi has a very poor prognosis and correlates with severity of injury. extended follow-up is necessary so as not to underestimate problems such as specific learning difficulties and attentional and memory problems that may become apparent only once the child is in school. behavioral problems are present in 52% and begin to manifest clinically between the second and third years of life, although the consequences of frontal lobe injury may be underestimated unless follow-up is extended into adolescence and early adulthood.

the u.s. preventive services task force (uspstf) is an independent panel of non-federal experts in prevention and primary care that systematically reviews the evidence of effectiveness and develops recommendations for clinical preventive services. this recommendation addresses the evidence for the accuracy of screening children and adolescents using bmi, the effectiveness of behavioral and pharmacologic interventions in improving health outcomes in these children, and the potential harms of routine screening and intervention. using uspstf methodology, an analytic framework with key questions was developed to guide the systematic review, which serves as the basis for this recommendation. the number of children and adolescents who are overweight has more than doubled in the last 25 years. childhood and adolescent overweight is associated with increased health risks. the uspstf found insufficient evidence for the effectiveness of behavioral counseling or other preventive interventions with overweight children and adolescents that can be conducted in primary care settings. currently, available studies are limited by factors such as small sample sizes, poor generalizability, and variable follow-up. based upon this critical gap in the evidence for effectiveness, the uspstf concludes that the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against routine screening for overweight in children and adolescents as a means to prevent adverse health outcomes ("i" recommendation). there are several gaps in the research evidence on screening and interventions for overweight children and adolescents in the primary care setting. research is needed to provide well-defined and effective approaches to medical and psychological screening in children, as well as effective clinical approaches for the prevention and treatment of overweight in children that can be implemented by primary care clinicians.

the purpose of this study was to identify adverse health consequences that may co-occur with depression among black female adolescents. adolescents were recruited from high-risk neighborhoods in birmingham, alabama. the sample comprised 460 black female adolescents (aged 14-18 years) who completed assessments at baseline and at 6 and 12 months. only adolescents who consistently scored above the threshold for depression at all 3 assessments (n = 76) or below the threshold at all 3 assessments (n = 174) were included (n = 250) in the data analysis. within this sample, adolescents who were depressed were compared with those who were not depressed with respect to the following health consequences: low self-esteem, emotional abuse, physical abuse, verbal abuse, poor body image, and antisocial behavior. using generalized estimating equations and controlling for covariates, depressed adolescents were 5.3 times more likely to report low self-esteem, 4.3 times more likely to report emotional abuse, 3.7 times more likely to report being physically abused, and almost 3 times as likely to report being verbally abused. furthermore, depressed adolescents were more than twice as likely to report poor body image and nearly twice as likely to report engaging in antisocial behaviors. the findings suggest that a broad range of adverse health consequences may accompany depression among black female adolescents. physicians need to be alert to the co-occurrence of depression and low self-esteem; emotional, physical, and verbal abuse; poor body image; and antisocial behaviors among this population.

in children with idiopathic short stature (iss), studies investigating body mass index (bmi) or parameters of satiety regulation are scarce, and studies analyzing eating behavior are lacking. we recruited 214 children (123 index cases and 91 siblings) with iss from 123 families. affected children had to have a body height <5th percentile, or, in the case of siblings, the body height of 1 child had to be <5th percentile and the other <15th percentile. medical histories were recorded by using structured and standardized interviews. eating behavior was assessed by using the child eating behavior questionnaire. percent energy intake as fat was assessed by using the leeds food frequency questionnaire. endocrine markers of body weight regulation (leptin, ghrelin) were determined in serum. compared with population norms, bmi was significantly lower (mean: -0.33 standard deviation score). furthermore, there was decreased food responsiveness (mean child eating behavior questionnaire score: 1.9; population mean: 2.4), reduced enjoyment of food (3.2 vs 3.9), emotional undereating (2.6 vs 3.0), lower desire to drink (2.0 vs 2.8), and increased fussiness over food (3.2 vs 2.9). when the sample was subdivided into the 2 groups of "good" and "poor" eaters according to the mothers' assessment of the current eating behavior, reduction in bmi as well as the behavioral characteristics already delineated in the total sample were found to be even more consistent in the subgroup of poor eaters. in the total sample of our children, as well as in both subgroups, serum leptin (adjusted for gender, bmi, and tanner stage) was found to be moderately raised but did not differ between poor and good eaters. total serum ghrelin was not different between poor and good eaters. our clinical, behavioral, and endocrinologic findings in patients with iss point to an altered eating behavior that possibly contributes to their short stature.

symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd) after life-threatening medical illness have been found to predict poor outcome in preliminary studies of adults and children. however, these symptoms are rarely recognized in general medical or pediatric settings. here we report on the first large investigation to assess prevalence and correlates of self-reported symptoms of posttraumatic stress in a nonreferred sample of adolescent liver, heart, and kidney transplant recipients. one hundred four adolescents, ages 12 to 20 years (mean: 15.7; sd: 2.1), completed and returned the university of california, los angeles, ptsd index for the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. all participants were at least 1 year post-initial transplant and were fluent speakers of english and/or spanish. more than 16% of the adolescents met all symptom criteria for ptsd, and an additional 14.4% met 2 of 3 symptom-cluster criteria. regression analysis indicated no effect of gender, ethnicity, age at interview, organ type, time since transplant, or age at transplant. as has been found with other life-threatening pediatric conditions, solid organ transplantation can precipitate symptoms of posttraumatic stress. symptoms are not predicted by what would be considered objective factors increasing life threat, suggesting a greater salience of subjective appraisal of threat, as has been seen in studies of childhood cancer survivors.

compliance, or adherence, as it relates to health care is the extent to which a person's behavior coincides with medical or health advice. medication compliance is critical for all aspects of pediatrics, specifically in successful treatment, disease prevention, and health promotion. compliance depends on the patient's and physician's committing to the same objectives. it is unfortunate that numerous studies and physician accounts reveal difficulties in achieving compliance with pediatric medication therapy. medication compliance in pediatric patients ranges from 11% to 93%. at least one third of all patients fail to complete relatively short-term treatment regimens. poor compliance places children at risk for problems such as continued disease, complicates the physician-patient relationship, and prevents accurate assessment of the quality of care provided. this article presents the issue in the context of its incidence of and barriers to compliance and provides general principles to improve compliance in pediatrics by improving communication and characteristics of the practice setting. a one-on-one relationship between physician and patient is needed for communication and improved compliance.

the gender gap describing the apparent differences in male and female reports of firearm-ownership and -storage habits has never been evaluated among individuals who live in the same household. thus, the objective of this study was to examine the level of agreement on household firearms and storage practices among cohabiting partners. data for this investigation came from follow-up telephone interviews of participants who underwent a randomized, controlled trial to test the effect of home-safety counseling, including firearm safety, on behavior change. baseline interviews were conducted at a level 1 pediatric emergency department in north carolina with adults who took a child or adolescent who was under his or her care to a pediatric emergency department. follow-up interviews were conducted via telephone at 18 months after intervention with participants who reported household firearms at baseline. participants then were asked whether their partners could be contacted for a separate telephone interview. the measured outcomes were number and type of household firearms and firearm-storage practices. the strength of agreement between partners' reported firearm-ownership and -storage practices was measured with the kappa statistic. seventy-six partner-respondent pairs completed the study (62% response rate). most initial respondents were white (89%), female (76%), and college graduates (52%); the median age was 37. there were no same-gender partners, and 91% reported that they were spouses. there was not perfect agreement among male and female partners with regard to the presence of household firearms. more men (80%) reported the presence of household firearms than did women (72%; kappa = .64). the discordance between partner pairs regarding the number of household firearms and type was poor to fair (kappa = .35 and .34, respectively). although similar proportions of men and women reported storing any household firearms loaded (10%) and storing all household firearms locked up (63% men and 62% women), the kappa values demonstrated only moderate agreement (kappa = .56-.60). most men (88%) and women (83%) reported that firearm storage was the husband's responsibility; 82% of men compared with 17% of women reported that they personally owned all of the firearms. a gender gap does exist in the reporting of firearm ownership with regard to the number and type of firearms owned. there are also differences in reported firearm-storage practices, which are likely related to the finding that men were reported to be the primary owner of firearms in most households as well as the person more commonly responsible for firearm storage. firearm-safety counseling should include male partners in the history-taking process to improve knowledge about the presence and storage patterns of household firearms.

to identify evidence-based pediatric guidelines and to assess their quality. we searched medline, embase, and relevant web sites of guideline development programs and national pediatric societies to identify evidence-based pediatric guidelines. a list with titles of identified guidelines was sent to 51 leading pediatricians in the netherlands, who were asked to select the 5 most urgent topics for guideline development. three pediatrician reviewers appraised the available guidelines on the 10 most frequently mentioned topics with the appraisal of guidelines for research and evaluation (agree) instrument. a total of 215 evidence-based pediatric guidelines were identified; of these, 17 guidelines on the 10 most frequently mentioned topics were appraised. the agree instrument rates guidelines among 6 domains. for the scope and purpose domain, the mean score was 84% of the maximal mark. for stakeholder involvement, the mean score was 42%, with 12 guidelines (71%) scoring <50%. for rigor of development, the mean score was 54%, with 5 guidelines (29%) scoring <50%. for clarity and presentation, the mean score was 78%, with 4 guidelines (24%) scoring <50%. for applicability and editorial independence, performance was poor, with mean scores of 19% and 40%, respectively. low scores were partly attributable to poor reporting. after considering all domain scores, the reviewers recommended 14 of 17 guidelines (82%) to be used in local practice. the current volume of pediatric guidelines categorized as evidence based in popular databases is large. overall, these guidelines scored well, compared with other studies on guideline quality in fields outside pediatrics, when assessed for quality with the agree instrument. this holds especially for guidelines published or endorsed by the american academy of pediatrics or registered in the national guideline clearinghouse.

cost-utility analysis in which health benefits are quantified in terms of quality-adjusted life-years (qalys) has now become the standard type of cost-effectiveness analysis. these studies are potentially influential in determining the extent of funding for particular pediatric interventions, and so their methodologic quality is extremely important. the objective of this study was twofold: first, to critically appraise published cost-utility analyses of interventions in child and adolescent health care in terms of the methods used to derive qalys and, second, to discuss unresolved methodologic issues that are pertinent to the measurement of qalys in pediatric populations. a comprehensive search using computerized databases (including medline, embase, econlit, and databases specific to economic evaluation), web searches, and citation tracking was undertaken to identify cost-utility studies of interventions that were aimed at those who were younger than 16 years and published before april 2004. the methods of individual studies were compared with the recognized published guidelines of the us panel on cost-effectiveness in health and medicine and the national institute for clinical excellence in england and wales, which recommend the use of a generic health state classification system (eg, health utility index, euroqol-5d), a choice-based valuation method (eg, standard gamble or time trade-off) and preferences of the general public in estimating qalys. studies therefore were categorized and evaluated according to the methods used to describe the health state, the valuation technique, and source of preferences. fifty-four studies were reviewed, 34 (63%) of which were published in the past 5 years. a generic health status classification instrument was used in 22 (35%) cases; the remainder developed study-specific health state descriptions or elicited preferences directly from patients or proxies. in 3 (5%) cases, sources were unclear. preference weights were elicited using choice-based techniques in 28 (42%) cases, either as tariffs for health status classification instruments (17 cases) or by directly valuing health state descriptions or patient health (11 cases). preferences of the general public were used in only 23 (37%) cases. four studies aggregated qalys for mother/child or parents/child pairs without giving any theoretical justification. although there was an increasing tendency for studies to use generic health status classification instruments, choice-based methods, and preferences of the general public, the majority of studies still did not adhere to these standard recommendations even in the period between january 2000 and march 2004. despite increasing standardization in the methods advocated for economic evaluation over the past 10 years, there remains extensive variation in the actual methods used by researchers to calculate qalys for children and adolescents. it is unclear whether these results suggest poor practice or a set of positive (or reactive) choices made by analysts in a methodologically uncertain area in which specific guidance is lacking regarding how to address the complexities of pediatric outcomes within the qaly framework. many aspects of qaly measurement in children are not yet fully developed. in particular, there is (1) a lack of appropriate health state classification instruments that take account of the dynamics of child development, (2) a lack of health state classification instruments for use in children and infants who are younger than 5 years, and (3) the need to understand fully the role of proxies for measuring and valuing child health. additional research efforts are also required to develop methods that account for the health benefits of parents or caregivers of the child and to consider the implications of combining different forms of utility measurement in childhood and adulthood. although variations from standard recommendations may be attributable to poor practice among researchers who are either unaware of these recommendations or choose not to follow them, they could equally be the result of attempts to make research more rigorous and more defensible than it might be if the standard recommendations were followed. there are 4 potential approaches to conducting cost-utility analysis in pediatric populations: (1) the explicit development of a generic instrument designed to be applicable across both child and adult populations (likely to be difficult in practice), (2) insistence on use of a generic instrument developed for adults, (3) the use of generic instruments specifically developed for children without being concerned about comparability with interventions aimed at adults, and (4) abandoning attempts to use single outcome measures that combine mortality with quality weights. in the absence of a clear way forward, it is suggested that an expert panel be convened to debate and further consider these potential solutions and recommendations for best practice and future research. in the interim, comparisons of the relative cost-effectiveness reported as cost per qaly gained across interventions for different diseases and populations should be treated with extreme caution.

the balanced budget act of 1997 established the state children's health insurance program (schip), which makes health insurance available to children in near-poor families who are ineligible for medicaid. schip mandates that all state plans cover the cost and administration of childhood vaccines. whether schip has narrowed immunization coverage rates between near-poor and nonpoor children is unknown. the objective of this study was to use data from the national immunization survey from 1995 to 2002 to analyze changes in immunization coverage rates among poor, near-poor, and nonpoor children before and after implementation of schip. a prepost analysis was made of changes in immunization rates among poor, near-poor, and nonpoor children before and after implementation of schip in all 50 states and 28 immunization action plan areas from 1995 to 2002. all children in the national immunization survey for whom information on vaccinations was available from the respondents' shot cards and/or from the children's immunization providers (n = 264214) were studied. up-to-date status for the 4:3:1 (4 doses of diphtheria-tetanus toxoids-pertussis vaccine/3 doses of poliovirus vaccine/1 dose of measles-mumps-rubella vaccine) and the 4:3:1:3:3 (4 doses of diphtheria-tetanus toxoids-pertussis vaccine/3 doses of poliovirus vaccine/1 dose of measles-mumps-rubella vaccine/3 doses of haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine/3 doses of hepatitis b vaccine) series as well at the hepatitis b and varicella vaccines was measured. the probability that a poor or near-poor child was up to date for the 4:3:1:3:3 vaccine series increased approximately 11 percentage points after implementation of schip. however, we observed a similar increase for nonpoor children. the proportion of poor and near-poor children who were up to date for the varicella vaccine increased between 7 and 8 percentage points more than among nonpoor children after implementation of schip. relative increases among poor and near-poor children were greater in the 28 immunization action plan areas, in states with high rates of uninsured children, and among hispanics. schip seems not to be associated with changes in the up-to-date status of poor and near-poor children for the 4:3:1 and the 4:3:1:3:3 vaccine series. vaccine coverage rates increased broadly among all income groups between 1995 and 2002.

there are so many problems facing children today (eg, violence, poor nutrition, substance abuse, teen pregnancy) that conventional medical care can only address a small portion of these concerns. thus, to be optimally effective, pediatrics needs to be linked to other disciplines and programs that address these issues by using different paradigms. robert haggerty, the originator of the term "community pediatrics," reflects on how one can successfully practice community pediatrics in an academic setting and model it for young physicians while also improving the health of children at the community level. here we tell the story of the years that haggerty was chief of pediatrics at the university of rochester and took on the challenge of fulfilling the department's responsibility to all children in the county. because of his pioneering work, his tenure was heralded as a critical period in the development of the field of community pediatrics.

to evaluate the prevalence of noncompliance and factors that influence poor adherence to immunosuppressive drug regimens among kidney transplant recipients. we reviewed immunosuppressive drug compliance in 79 posttransplant patients. patient self-report and low plasma calcineurin inhibitor levels served as indicators of noncompliance. the prevalence of noncompliance was found to be highest in adolescents who were responsible for their own medications and who underwent cadaveric kidney transplantation (ctx; 45.5%) and lower after living related transplantation (28.6%). there were no documented cases of noncompliance among any recipient of living unrelated (commercial) transplantation. among 13 noncompliant patients, the first indication of "drug holiday" was low plasma calcineurin inhibitor levels in 11 children. two additional children presented with acute rejection. in 7 patients, repeated episodes of "drug holidays" led to acute rejection later: 21.4 +/- 13.2 months after the first decrease in plasma calcineurin inhibitor level had been recorded. all 9 patients who experienced acute rejection subsequently developed chronic rejection. in 4 patients, noncompliance did not influence graft function. psychosocial factors that were associated with noncompliance included insufficient family support, low self-awareness caused by poor cognitive abilities, and denial. the absence of cases of noncompliance in adolescents who underwent commercial living unrelated kidney transplantation suggests that although noncompliance is prevalent, it is not inevitable. strategies to decrease noncompliance in young patients with chronic illnesses can be learned from the experience with transplant recipients. the general pediatrician has a central role in identifying and addressing the problem of noncompliance in adolescents with chronic disease.

to characterize use of volume infusion (vi) for infants who are > or =34 weeks' gestational age and receive intensive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr; defined as >1 minute of positive-pressure ventilation and chest compressions, with or without the administration of medications) in the delivery room and are admitted to the nicu. a retrospective review of a resuscitation registry between january 1999 and june 2001 was conducted. of 37,972 infants, 23 received cpr, including 13 with vi. ten of 13 received vi for persistent bradycardia despite cpr, and only 3 of 13 received vi for suspicion of hypovolemia with poor perfusion. more vi versus no vi infants had apgar scores < or =2 at 5 and 10 minutes. vi versus no vi infants had lower cord arterial ph, had higher arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide, had larger base deficit, required longer cpr, and required more epinephrine. on admission to the nicu, vi versus no vi infants had lower blood pressure and larger base deficit over the first 2 hours but did not differ in arterial ph, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide, heart rate, mortality, or use of additional vi or buffer. vi is rarely given for overt hypovolemia and more often for asphyxiated infants who are slow to respond to intensive cpr. persistent postnatal hypotension in vi infants suggests that other factors, eg, myocardial dysfunction, may be important contributors to lack of response to cpr.

to examine adult socioeconomic, educational, social, and health outcomes of being in public care in childhood. the 1970 british birth cohort was followed up at 5 (n = 13135), 10 (14875), 16 (11622), and 30 years (11261). cases were defined as those ever in statutory or voluntary public care at 5, 10, and 16 years. self-reported adult outcomes were occupation, educational achievement, general health, psychological morbidity, history of homelessness, school exclusion, and convictions. a total of 343 (3.6%) of 9557 had been in public care <17 years. nonwhite children were more likely to have been in care (odds ratio [or]: 3.3; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 2.1-5.4). controlling for socioeconomic status, men with a history of public care were less likely to attain high social class (or: 0.6; 95% ci: 0.4-0.9) and more likely to have been homeless (or: 2.0; 95% ci: 1.1-3.8), have a conviction (or: 2.3; 95% ci: 1.5-3.4), have psychological morbidity (or: 1.8; 95% ci: 1.1-3.0), and be in poor general health (or: 1.6; 95% ci: 1.1-2.6). similar associations were found in women. men but not women with a history of care were more likely to be unemployed (or: 2.6; 95% ci: 1.4-5.0) and less likely to attain a higher degree (or: 0.4; 95% ci: 0.2-0.7). nonwhite ethnicity was associated with poorer adult outcomes of being in care. public care in childhood is associated with adverse adult socioeconomic, educational, legal, and health outcomes in excess of that associated with childhood or adult disadvantage.

necrotizing enterocolitis (nec) is a significant complication for the premature infant. however, subsequent neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes of extremely low birth weight (elbw) infants with nec have not been well described. we hypothesized that elbw infants with surgically managed (surgnec) are at greater risk for poor neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes than infants with medically managed nec (mednec) compared with infants without a history of nec (nonec). the objective of this study was to compare growth, neurologic, and cognitive outcomes among elbw survivors of surgnec and mednec with nonec at 18 to 22 months' corrected age. multicenter, retrospective analysis was conducted of infants who were born between january 1, 1995, and december 31, 1998, and had a birth weight <1000 g in the national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network registry. neurodevelopment and growth were assessed at 18 to 22 months' postmenstrual age. chi2, t test, and logistic regression analyses were used. a total of 2948 infants were evaluated at 18 to 22 months, 124 of whom were surgnec and 121 of whom were mednec. compared with nonec, both surgnec and mednec infants were of lower birth weight and had a greater incidence of late sepsis; surgnec but not mednec infants were more likely to have received a diagnosis of cystic periventricular leukomalacia and bronchopulmonary dysplasia and been treated with postnatal steroids. weight, length, and head circumference <10 percentile at 18 to 22 months were significantly more likely among surgnec but not mednec compared with nonec infants. after correction for anthropometric measures at birth and adjusted age at follow-up, all growth parameters at 18 to 22 months for surgnec but not mednec infants were significantly less than for nonec infants. surgnec but not mednec was a significant independent risk factor for mental developmental index <70 (odds ratio [or]: 1.61; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.05-2.50), psychomotor developmental index <70 (or: 1.95; 95% ci: 1.25-3.04), and neurodevelopmental impairment (or: 1.78; 95% ci: 1.17-2.73) compared with nonec. among elbw infants, surgnec is associated with significant growth delay and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18 to 22 months' corrected age compared with nonec. mednec does not seem to confer additional risk. surgnec is likely to be associated with greater severity of disease.

the use of complementary and alternative medicine (cam) has grown substantially in north america and has drawn the attention of conventional-medicine practitioners. conventional-medicine practitioners have expressed concern about the potential for unregulated cam therapies to cause harm, the sometimes-uncertain cost-benefit ratios associated with these therapies, and the possibility that some cam providers might advise against established conventional therapies, such as vaccination. these concerns are heightened with respect to the pediatric use of cam products. to address this issue, we conducted a systematic audit of pediatric and adolescent case files at a large, college-based, canadian naturopathic teaching clinic. we specifically sought to describe the demographic characteristics, reasons for presentation, use of cam products, and vaccinations status of children presenting for naturopathic assessment. we also determined factors associated with the use of cam products and vaccination status. we identified all charts for children (<18 years of age) who presented to the robert schad naturopathic clinic, the teaching clinic of the canadian college of naturopathic medicine, between february 1 and may 31, 2002. data were abstracted directly from the standardized patient intake forms and from clinical notes recorded during the patient's initial visit to the clinic. the following data were obtained: age, gender, chief presenting complaints reported by parents, cam product use at presentation, vaccination status, and reactions to vaccination. we conducted logistic regression analyses to identify factors associated with both cam product use and vaccination status. a total of 482 charts were identified. the mean age of patients was 6.5 years (95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.6-11.4 years). the ratio of female subjects to male subjects was 1.09:1 (248:227). the most common reasons for presentation were skin disorders (23%), gastrointestinal complaints (17%), and psychiatric/behavioral disorders (15%). thirty-five percent of children were using cam products at presentation (21.2% when both vitamins and minerals were excluded). vitamins were the most commonly used products (34.6%), followed by herbal remedies (14.9%), oil blends/fats (7.2%), minerals (5.6%), probiotics (4.5%), and homeopathic remedies (3.7%). of charts with vaccination information, 8.9% indicated that children had not been vaccinated; possible vaccine-associated adverse events were reported for 27% of those who had been vaccinated. partial or unvaccinated status was associated with younger age, attending the canadian college of naturopathic medicine for advice regarding vaccination, and greater use of cam products. cam product use was associated with unvaccinated or partially vaccinated status (odds ratio [or]: 2.86; 95% ci: 1.46-5.63), presenting with poor energy or fatigue (or: 3.36; 95% ci: 1.00-11.26), or presenting with throat or sinus infections (or: 4.06; 95% ci: 1.23-13.04). children present for naturopathic assessment for diverse reasons, are high-level consumers of cam products, and have lower rates of vaccination than population averages. the conventional-medicine community should work with naturopaths to address public health concerns in this population.

to describe the sociodemographic differences among mexican american children (first, second, and third generation), non-hispanic black children, and non-hispanic white children; to compare the health status and health care needs of mexican american children (first, second, and third generation) with those of non-hispanic black children and non-hispanic white children; and to determine whether first-generation mexican american children have poorer health care access and utilization than do non-hispanic white children, after controlling for health insurance status and socioeconomic status. the third national health and nutrition examination survey was used to create a sample of 4372 mexican american children (divided into 3 generational groups), 4138 non-hispanic black children, and 4594 non-hispanic white children, 2 months to 16 years of age. we compared parent/caregiver reports of health status and needs (perceived health of the child and reported illnesses), health care access (usual source of health care and specific provider), and health care utilization (contact with a physician within the past year, use of prescription medications, physician visit because of earache/infection, and hearing and vision screenings) for different subgroups within the sample. more than two thirds of first-generation mexican american children were poor and uninsured and had parents with low educational attainment. more than one fourth of first-generation children were perceived as having poor or fair health, despite experiencing similar or better rates of illnesses, compared with other children. almost one half of first-generation mexican american children had not seen a doctor in the past year, compared with one fourth or less for other groups. health care needs among first-generation mexican american children were lower, on the basis of reported illnesses, but perceived health status was worse than for all other groups. after controlling for health insurance coverage and socioeconomic status, first-generation mexican american children and non-hispanic black children were less likely than non-hispanic white children to have a usual source of care, to have a specific provider, or to have seen or talked with a physician in the past year. of the 3 groups of children, mexican american children had the least health care access and utilization, even after controlling for socioeconomic status and health insurance status. our findings showed that mexican american children had much lower levels of access and utilization than previously reported for hispanic children on the whole. as a subgroup, first-generation mexican american children fared substantially worse than second- or third-generation children. the discrepancy between poor perceived health status and lower rates of reported illnesses in the first-generation group leads to questions regarding generalized application of the "epidemiologic paradox." given the overall growth of the hispanic population in the united states and the relative growth of individual immigrant subgroups, the identification of subgroups in need is essential for the development of effective research and policy. furthermore, taking generational status into account is likely to be revealing with respect to disparities in access to and utilization of pediatric services.

neuropsychological functioning and its correlation with viral load were investigated for previously treated hiv-infected children who underwent a change in treatment regimen. thirteen age-appropriate measures of cognitive, neurologic, and behavioral functioning were administered to 489 hiv-infected children who were aged 4 months to 17 years and had been treated previously for at least 16 weeks with antiretroviral therapy. these clinically and immunologically stable children were randomized onto 1 of 7 drug treatment combinations, 6 of which included a protease inhibitor (pi), and evaluated prospectively for 48 weeks with respect to changes in neuropsychological performance and viral load. neuropsychological functioning was significantly poorer at baseline for the hiv-infected children as compared with established norms for their age. children with higher viral load had poorer cognitive, both-hands fine-motor, and neurologic signs at baseline, but single-hand fine-motor and behavioral functioning were not correlated with viral load. after 48 weeks of treatment with pi-containing combination therapy, there was significant improvement in only the vocabulary score. neuropsychological changes did not differ among the 6 pi-containing combination regimens. at week 48, even children with a viral load response below the level of detection (rna < or =400 copies/ml) still showed poorer neuropsychological functioning compared with established norms. poor neuropsychological functioning was seen for hiv-infected children and was worse for children with higher viral loads. only 1 measure of neuropsychological functioning showed improvement after treatment with pi-containing combination therapy, and the extent of that improvement was relatively minor. treatment strategies for children with hiv disease need to be reevaluated so that they consider restoration of neuropsychological functioning in addition to lowering the viral load.

childhood and adolescent overweight and obesity have increased substantially in the past 2 decades, raising concerns about the physical and psychosocial consequences of childhood obesity. we investigated the association between obesity and health-related quality of life in a nationally representative sample of adolescents. a cross-sectional analysis was conducted using the 1996 national longitudinal study of adolescent health, a nationally representative sample of adolescents in grades 7 to 12 during the 1994-1995 school year, and 4743 adolescents with direct measures of height and weight. using centers for disease control and prevention growth charts to determine percentiles, we used 5 body mass categories. underweight was at or below the 5th percentile, normal bmi was between the 5th and 85th percentiles, at risk for overweight was between the 85th and 95th percentiles, overweight was between the 95th and 97th percentiles + 2 bmi units, and obese was at or above the 97th percentile + 2 bmi units. four dimensions of health-related quality of life were measured: general health (self-reported general health), physical health (absence or presence of functional limitations and illness symptoms), emotional health (the center for epidemiologic studies depression scale and rosenberg's self-esteem scale), and a school and social functioning scale. we found a statistically significant relationship between bmi and general and physical health but not psychosocial outcomes. adolescents who were overweight had significantly worse self-reported health (odds ratio [or]: 2.17; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.34-3.51), as did obese adolescents (or: 4.49; 95% ci: 2.87-7.03). overweight (or: 1.81; 95% ci: 1.22-2.68) and obese (or: 1.91; 95% ci: 1.24-1.95) adolescents were also more likely to have a functional limitation. only among the youngest adolescents (ages 12-14) did we find a significant deleterious impact of overweight and obesity on depression, self-esteem, and school/social functioning. using a nationally representative sample, we found that obesity in adolescence is linked with poor physical quality of life. however, in the general population, adolescents with above normal body mass did not report poorer emotional, school, or social functioning.

the recognition of health disparities as an important aspect of us health care has led to renewed interest in the reporting of race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status (ses) in original research reports. to describe reporting of race/ethnicity and ses, in comparison with age and gender, and to report changes with time. all original research articles that focused on children and asthma that were published in the journal of the american medical association, the new england journal of medicine, pediatrics, the journal of pediatrics, and archives of pediatrics and adolescent medicine were reviewed for 2 time periods, 1991-1993 and 2000-2002. each report was assessed for coding of age, gender, race/ethnicity (number of groups and which groups), and ses. in 1991-1993, 27 reports met the inclusion criteria; in 2000-2002, 74 were reviewed. overall, significantly more reports described age (90.1%) and gender (78.2%) than ses (41.6%) and race/ethnicity (54.5%). during the 2 study periods, there were significant increases in studies reporting race/ethnicity (from 29.6% to 63.5%) but not in studies reporting ses or gender. coding of race/ethnicity, even in the later time period, was largely confined to white (78.7%) and black (89.4%). fewer reports coded latino (55.3%) or asian (14.9%). only 2 of the 31 articles that coded latino subjects contained information on ethnic subgroups, whereas none of the 8 articles included asian subgroups. original research reports in a specific area (asthma) for which health disparities have been well documented still contain few data on race/ethnicity and ses, particularly in comparison with age and gender. there has been some improvement in the past decade in the reporting of race/ethnicity, but the reporting of latino and asian subgroups remains poor. if we are to understand health disparities, then more appropriate reporting of ses and race/ethnicity is necessary.

echocardiography has been shown to be highly accurate in infants and children, but its accuracy has not been studied in detail in low birth weight (lbw) infants with structural congenital heart disease (chd). this study was undertaken to examine the diagnostic accuracy of echocardiography in the evaluation of chd in these infants. all echocardiograms performed between 1995 and 2000 on infants who had structural chd and weighed 2.5 kg, matched for type of chd, were control subjects (n = 319). the results of initial echocardiograms were compared for diagnostic accuracy with consensus diagnoses on the basis of all confirmatory data available. an observer who was blinded to patient group graded a sample of randomly selected echocardiograms (n = 100) for technical quality. there were 13 major diagnostic errors in the lbw infants (5.2%) and 6 in the control subjects (1.9%). there were 20 minor errors in the lbw group (8.0%) and 21 in the control subjects (6.6%). the technical quality scores of the 2 groups were not significantly different, but a higher proportion of the lbw studies were graded as "poor" or "borderline" quality, compared with the control subjects (40% vs 28%). the majority (54%) of major errors in the lbw infants could potentially be explained by alterations in blood flow secondary to pulmonary hypertension. although echocardiography is an accurate imaging modality in premature and lbw infants with structural chd, the incidence of clinically important diagnostic errors is higher than in infants who weigh >2.5 kg. as surgical and transcatheter interventions are extended to this population, heightened awareness of clinicians to pitfalls of echocardiography in this group of patients is warranted.

family-centeredness, compassion, and trust are 3 attributes of the clinician-parent relationship in the medical home. among adults, these attributes are associated with patients' adherence to clinicians' advice. the objectives were (1) to measure medical home attributes related to the clinician-parent relationship, (2) to measure provision of anticipatory guidance regarding injury and illness prevention, (3) to relate anticipatory guidance to parental behavior changes, and (4) to relate medical home attributes to anticipatory guidance and parental behavior changes. a cross-sectional study of data collected among at-risk families when children were 1 year of age, in a randomized, controlled trial of a home-visiting program to prevent child abuse and neglect, was performed. modified subscales of the primary care assessment survey were used to measure parental ratings of clinicians' family-centeredness, compassion, and trust. parental reports of provision of anticipatory guidance regarding injury and illness prevention topics (smoke alarms, infant walkers, car seats, hot water temperature, stair guards, sunscreen, firearm safety, and bottle propping) and behavior changes were recorded. of the 564 mothers interviewed when their children were 1 year of age, 402 (71%) had a primary care provider and had complete data for anticipatory guidance items. by definition, poverty, partner violence, poor maternal mental health, and maternal substance abuse were common in the study sample. maternal ratings of clinicians' family-centeredness, compassion, and trust were fairly high but ranged widely and varied among population subgroups. families reported anticipatory guidance for a mean of 4.6 +/- 2.2 topics relevant for discussion. each medical home attribute was positively associated with parental reports of completeness of anticipatory guidance, ie, family-centeredness (beta = .026, se = .004), compassion (beta = .019, se = .005), and trust (beta = .016, se = .005). parents' perceptions of behavior changes were positively associated with trust (beta = .018, se = .006). analyses were adjusted for potential confounding by randomized, controlled trial group assignment, receipt of >or=5 well-child visits, and baseline attributes. among at-risk families, we found an association between parental ratings of the medical home and parental reports of the completeness of anticipatory guidance regarding selected injury and illness prevention topics. parents' trust of the clinician was associated with parent-reported behavior changes for discussed topics.

the list of recommended pediatric preventive services has grown considerably in the past decade, and clinician variability, clinician distribution, and other correlates of provision of these basic preventive services (bps) are not known. to describe the proportion of high-quality basic pediatric preventive services, exclusive of immunizations, reported by parents and to identify sociodemographic and health system predictors and health service correlates of provision of these services. the study used cross-sectional data on 2041 children, 4 to 35 months of age, in the 2000 national survey of early childhood health. the bps measure assesses the receipt of (1) developmental assessment, (2) injury prevention counseling, (3) screening for parental smoking, (4) guidance on reading to the child, and (5) guidance on 14 other topics (assessed as a composite score). the bps scale categorizes the receipt of services as excellent, good, fair, or poor. most children received excellent (34.9%) or good (31.5%) care, but many received fair (24.9%) or poor (8.7%) care. sociodemographic and health care factors such as race/ethnicity, insurance, and practice setting were not associated with bps levels. higher bps scores were associated with parental reports of longer well-child visits, more counseling regarding family and community risk factors, lower rates of delayed or missed care, and greater satisfaction. two thirds of children receive good or excellent basic preventive care, as determined with this composite, and no disparities according to race/ethnicity, income, or health insurance status of families (which are often found to be associated with health care access) were found. this equitable distribution of high-quality care suggests a high level of clinician professionalism. duration of visits may be a key factor to improve quality of care. because of its association with other services, processes, and outcomes of care, the bps scale may serve as a useful construct for monitoring quality and stimulating efforts to improve national pediatric preventive care.

the serum electrolyte panel (sep) is a frequently ordered laboratory test, but it has unproven usefulness in the treatment of dehydrated pediatric patients. our study purpose was to evaluate the usefulness of routinely ordering a sep in the treatment of dehydrated pediatric patients receiving intravenous fluids (ivfs). children 2 months to 9 years of age who were receiving ivfs because of dehydration were prospectively studied in a pediatric emergency department (ped). historical data, physical examination findings, degree of dehydration, and sep results were recorded. after patient evaluation, attending physicians documented whether they would have ordered a sep. outcome measurements included changes in clinical management on the basis of sep results, as well as correlations of dispositions and unscheduled return visits (urvs) with sep results. a total of 182 patients were enrolled in the study. one hundred eleven patients had mild dehydration, 55 moderate dehydration, and 16 severe dehydration. eighty-eight patients (48%; 95% confidence interval: 41-56%) had > or =1 abnormal sep value. clinically relevant findings included bicarbonate levels of <16 mmol/l for 28% of patients, hypoglycemia for 9.9%, hypokalemia for 6.0%, and hypernatremia for 3.0%. the attending physicians predicted that a sep would be clinically important for 34% of all patients. there was a 58% sensitivity in detecting which children would have clinically significant sep results. overall, sep results changed clinical management in 10.4% of cases. one hundred sixty-five (91%) of the patients were discharged from the ped (including 48 who were initially observed), of whom 7 (3.8%) had urvs to the ped within 72 hours and were given additional ivfs. seventeen patients were admitted (median: 2.6 days), 2 of whom had urvs after hospital discharge for additional ivfs. on the basis of initial presentation, attending physicians were poor at predicting which children would have clinically significant sep results. low bicarbonate values were correlated with observation unit use but not with hospitalization or urvs. the observation unit provided effective care for a subset of dehydrated patients, avoiding the need for hospitalization. obtaining a sep can provide useful information for the treatment of some children receiving ivfs because of dehydration.

to compare providers' impressions of adolescents' level of substance use with diagnostic classifications from a structured diagnostic interview. secondary analysis of data was conducted from a validation study of the crafft substance abuse screening test of 14- to 18-year-old medical clinic patients (n = 533) and their corresponding medical care providers (n = 109) at an adolescent clinic affiliated with a large tertiary care pediatric hospital. medical care providers completed a form that recorded their clinical impressions of patients' level of alcohol and drug involvement (none, minimal, problem, abuse, dependence) and demographic characteristics. the form included brief diagnostic descriptions for each level of use. after the medical visit, patients completed the adolescent diagnostic interview (adi), a structured diagnostic interview that yields diagnoses of abuse and dependence according to the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, fourth edition (dsm-iv). on the basis of their past 12 months of alcohol and drug use on the adi interview, adolescents were classified into 5 mutually exclusive diagnostic groups. "none" was defined by no reported use of alcohol or drugs during the past year. "minimal use" was defined as use of alcohol or drugs but no report of any substance-related problems. "problem use" was defined as reporting 1 or more substance-related problems but no diagnosis of abuse or dependence. "abuse" was defined by meeting any 1 of 4 dsm-iv diagnostic criteria for either alcohol or drug abuse but no diagnosis of dependence. "dependence" was defined by meeting any 3 of 7 diagnostic criteria for either alcohol or drug dependence, with or without a diagnosis of abuse. proportions were compared using fisher exact test. agreement was assessed with the weighted kappa, and these analyses were stratified by substance used (ie, alcohol vs drug) and demographic characteristics. sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values were calculated from 2 x 2 tables. compared with the criterion standard interview, providers identified significantly fewer patients with problem use and abuse and no patients with dependence. of >100 patients whom the adi classified with substance problem use, providers correctly identified 18. of 50 patients who were classified with a diagnosis of alcohol or drug abuse, providers correctly identified 10. of 36 patients who were classified with a diagnosis of alcohol or drug dependence, providers correctly identified none. for the 86 adolescents who were classified with a substance-related disorder (ie, abuse or dependence), providers' impressions were "none" (24.4%), "minimal use" (50%), "problem use" (15.1%), "abuse" (10.5%), and "dependence" (0%). there was only marginal agreement between providers' impressions and diagnoses related to alcohol use (kappa = .29), drug use (kappa = .31), and any substance use (kappa = .30). kappa was not significantly affected by the patient's age, but it was by gender. among boys, kappa was significantly higher for impressions of drug use versus alcohol use (kappa = .48 vs kappa = .27); and, among drug users, kappa was significantly higher among boys compared with girls (kappa = .48 vs kappa = .24). kappa did not differ significantly across race/ethnicity subgroups, although there is a suggestive trend toward higher agreement for black non-hispanic compared with white non-hispanic adolescents (kappa = .35 vs kappa = .21). kappa did not differ significantly on the basis of the visit type, but the size of this difference (kappa = .36 vs kappa = .24) suggests that the longer well-child visit yielded greater identification of substance-related pathology. providers' impressions had a sensitivity of .63 for identifying use of alcohol or drugs. however, sensitivity was poor for identification of problem use (.14), abuse (.10), and dependence (0), whereas specificity and positive predictive values were high. of the 86 adolescents with a diagnosis of abuse or dependence, 75.6% were correctly identified by providers as using substances; however, the level of use in 50% of these adolescents was reported by providers as minimal. in this study, clinical impressions of adolescents' alcohol/drug involvement underestimated substance-related pathology. when providers thought that use was present, there was a very high likelihood that a problem or disorder existed. the use of structured screening devices would likely improve identification of adolescents with substance-related pathology in primary care settings and should be considered for use with all adolescent patients, rather than only those who are perceived to be at higher risk.

studies of developmental outcomes in children with congenital heart disease (chd) frequently use assessments conducted in infancy as primary endpoints. whether test scores of chd patients in infancy are predictive of status at school age has not been evaluated, however. in the boston circulatory arrest study, 135 children with d-transposition of the great arteries repaired by arterial switch operation were administered the bayley scales of infant development and the fagan test of infant intelligence at 1 year of age and the wechsler intelligence scale for children, third edition and the wechsler individual achievement test at 8 years. although most 1-year test scores were significantly associated with 8-year test scores, the amounts of shared variance were modest (<10%). all 1-year test scores had poor sensitivity (16%-32%) and poor positive predictive value (35%-42%) but good specificity (80%-93%) and negative predictive value (78%-79%). more than half of the children with low scores at 8 years (< or =85) had had scores >84 at 1 year. this pattern suggests that although test scores at 1 year are modestly associated with test scores at 8 years, many children who are at risk for poor late outcomes will not be identified on the basis of 1-year test scores. long-term follow-up of children with chd is necessary to draw inferences about the developmental sequelae of preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative factors.

sleep-disordered breathing is associated with impaired behavior and poor academic performance in children. we aimed to determine the extent of behavioral problems in snoring children, clarify the role of intermittent hypoxia, and test the reversibility of impaired behavior and poor academic performance. in 1144 children, habitual snoring (hs; snoring frequently or always) and impaired behavior were assessed using parental questionnaires. intermittent hypoxia (ie, presence of > or =5 arterial oxygen desaturations by > or =4% or > or =1 desaturation to < or =90%) was investigated with pulse oximetry. poor academic performance (grade 4-6 on a 6-point scale in mathematics, science, or spelling) was based on the last school report. hs, impaired behavior, and academic performance were reevaluated after 1 year. adjusted odds ratios (ors) were calculated using unconditional logistic regression. hs was significantly associated with hyperactive (or: 2.4) and inattentive behavior (or: 4.0), daytime tiredness (or: 7.1), and sleepiness (or: 2.6-4.8). these associations were independent of intermittent hypoxia. hs was also significantly associated with bad conduct (or: 2.8), emotional symptoms (or: 5.5), and peer problems (or: 9.7). at follow-up, hyperactive and inattentive behavior but not academic success had significantly improved in children in whom hs had ceased. we suggest that impaired behavior is a key feature of hs independent of intermittent hypoxia and improves when hs ceases.

to examine the association of teacher- and parent-rated behavior with headache in a prospective follow-up study of adolescent finnish twins. questionnaire data were collected during 1995-2001 from a nationwide sample of finnish families of 11-year-old twins who were born 1983-1987 (n = 5393) and again at age of 14. psychological factors were measured by using parents' and teachers' ratings of a 37-item multidimensional rating instrument at the ages of 11 and 14. at age 11, headache frequency (5 categories) was associated with total scales of externalizing and internalizing problem behaviors and adaptive behaviors, assessed by parents, but only with externalizing problem behaviors assessed by teachers. results were similar at age 14. the incidence of at least monthly headache between the ages of 11 and 14 years was predicted by externalizing problem behaviors and 2 subscales of adaptive behaviors: constructiveness and poor compliance. in twin pairs discordant for headache, externalizing and internalizing problem behaviors were more common among headache sufferers than among headache-nonsufferers. headache-discordant monozygotic co-twins confirmed the association of externalizing problem behaviors with headache. the frequency of adolescents' headache is predicted by psychological factors, especially by externalizing problem behaviors. this seems to be independent of genetic or familial influences on behavior and headache. behavioral problems may be a sign of worsening of headache or vice versa.

despite great needs, many children in foster care do not receive adequate medical care. suboptimal care may be attributable in part to placement changes, which disrupt continuity of care by both a consistent surrogate parent and potentially a primary care physician. these disruptions in turn may lead to increased use of the emergency department (ed) for outpatient care. the primary aim of this study was to test whether a greater rate of placement changes was associated with increasing use of the ed among children in their first year of foster care. the secondary aim was to compare ed visit rates with rates of visits to other ambulatory care settings among children in foster care and other medicaid-eligible children not in foster care. using medicaid claims linked to foster care administrative data, we assembled a retrospective cohort of foster children in a large urban municipality from 1993 to 1996. eligible children spent at least 9 months in a new episode of foster care and were continuously eligible for medicaid during a 1-year follow-up period. a comparison cohort was drawn from medicaid-eligible children not in foster care during fiscal year 1995. the dependent variable was the rate of visits to the ed or other ambulatory care settings during a 1-year follow-up period. a negative binomial model estimated visit rates to the ed and other ambulatory care settings as the number of foster care placements increased. potential interactions were considered between age and location of service use (ed or ambulatory care setting), between age and foster care placements, and between location of service use and number of foster care placements. the 2358 children in the sample accounted for 1206 ed visits during the follow-up period; 38% experienced >or=2 placement changes. children of all ages exhibited increasing reliance on the ed for ambulatory care services as the number of placements increased, with the rates of ed use more than doubling for all age groups beyond infancy. however, other ambulatory care service use increased by only 41% to 53%; there was much less utilization in these nonemergency settings for all children but particularly toddlers and infants, compared with their medicaid-eligible peers. although the absolute rates of all visits for younger foster children (<6 years of age) were low, older foster children had increasingly greater ed use than did their medicaid-eligible peers, with nearly double the rate of ed visits in the adolescent age group. a temporal relationship between placements and ed visits was also identified; 75% of ed visits occurring within 3 weeks of a placement change occurred in the period after a placement change. foster children received fewer overall outpatient services than did their medicaid-eligible peers, but with age and increasing numbers of placements, had higher visit rates and received a greater proportion of their overall outpatient care in the ed. these results suggest that poor access to nonemergent ambulatory care settings might have contributed to an increasing reliance on ed settings as foster care placements increased. the temporal relationship between ed visits and placement changes underscores the need for better health care management for foster children, particularly in the period after placement changes.

healthy people 2010 calls for reductions in rapid repeat births (rrbs), defined as births occurring within 24 months after a previous birth for women of all ages, and prevention of repeat births during adolescence, regardless of the birth interval. home visiting has been promoted as a mechanism to prevent child abuse and neglect and to improve pregnancy outcomes. this study aims to assess the impact of home visiting in preventing rrb and its malleable determinants and assesses the influence of rrb on the mother and the index child. we hypothesized that maternal desire to have a rrb, access to a family planning site, and use of birth control would be significant malleable determinants and that the effects of the program in preventing rrb would be mediated through its influence on these variables. we also hypothesized that the occurrence of rrb would result in increased stress and family dysfunction, resulting in adverse maternal and child outcomes such as severe maternal stress, maternal neglect of the index child, decreased maternal warmth toward the index child, and increased behavior problems of the index child. the healthy start program (hsp) is a home visiting program to prevent child abuse and neglect and to promote child health and development among newborns of families identified as being at risk for child maltreatment. this study was a randomized, controlled trial of hawaii's hsp, in which eligible families were randomly assigned to home-visited and control groups. a total of 643 families at risk for child abuse were enrolled between november 1994 and december 1995. data to measure rrb and malleable determinants were collected through structured maternal interviews and observation of the home environment. we measured rrb through maternal self-report by asking about a subsequent birth in follow-up interviews at 1, 2, and 3 years. to measure the malleable determinants, we measured the mother's desire for a rrb at baseline and at the 1-year interview and determined whether she had access to a family planning site. the mother was also asked which contraceptive methods she had ever used in the past and which methods, if any, she used in the year following the index child's birth. we measured 3 maternal parenting outcomes at the year 3 follow-up interview, ie, parenting stress, neglectful behavior toward the index child, and warmth toward the index child. we used odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (cis) to measure the strength of associations. multiple logistic regression was used to assess 1) program effects on rrb and its malleable determinants, 2) the impact of the malleable determinants on rrb, and 3) the association between rrb and adverse maternal and child outcomes. each year, 88% of the sample completed a follow-up interview; 81% completed all 3 follow-up interviews. there was no program impact on rrb for mothers overall (hsp: 21%; control: 20%; adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 1.05; 95% ci: 0.69-1.58). hsp and control groups did not differ significantly in any of the malleable determinants of rrb. when we combined the 2 study groups, malleable determinants had significant effects on rrb. mothers with a desire to have a child within 2 years after the index birth were significantly more likely to have a rrb, whether this desire was expressed at baseline (aor: 2.48; 95% ci: 1.32-4.64) or at the year 1 interview (aor: 2.86; 95% ci: 1.57-5.22). lack of access to a family planning site at baseline was not associated with rrb, but there was a trend toward a greater likelihood of rrb among those lacking a site at 1 year (aor: 1.61; 95% ci: 0.93-2.79). women who had never used birth control before the index birth were more likely to have a rrb (aor: 1.89; 95% ci: 1.20-2.98), and there was a trend toward a greater likelihood of rrb among women who did not use birth control in the year following the index child's birth (aor: 1.67; 95% ci: 0.98-2.82). at the 3-year follow-up interview, mothers with a rrb were more likely to have adverse maternal and child outcomes. there was greater likelihood of severe maternal parenting stress (aor: 2.29; 95% ci: 1.17-4.48), neglectful behavior toward the index child (aor: 2.42; 95% ci: 1.41-4.18), and poor warmth toward the index child (aor: 2.84; 95% ci: 1.71-4.42). in families with a rrb, the index child was more likely to exhibit internalizing behavior (aor: 1.64; 95% ci: 1.04-2.58) and there was a trend toward higher odds of externalizing behavior (aor: 1.56; 95% ci: 0.98-2.49). overall, 20% of the mothers in our sample of at-risk families had a rrb, which was far greater than the national average of 11%. rrb was associated with a greater likelihood of adverse consequences for both the mother and the index child. the lack of program effects can be traced to shortcomings in the program's design and implementation system. hsp contracts required only that family planning be introduced any time during a family's first year of enrollment. because conception can occur very soon after the index birth, a better design would be to introduce family planning counseling early in a family's enrollment in home visiting. another shortcoming was that, although fathers could be included in counseling, they took part in only approximately one-fifth of home visits. it is possible that program effects were attenuated in families in which the father wanted a child. in conclusion, the hawaii hsp did not reduce rrb or alter its malleable determinants. rrb was associated with adverse outcomes for both the mother and the index child. this is particularly relevant for this population of families that are already at risk for child maltreatment, for which we have found parenting stress to be associated with abusive parenting behavior by the mother. our findings support and broaden the rationale for the healthy people 2010 objective to reduce rrb. we think our findings are valuable for guiding the future development of home visiting in general and this widely replicated paraprofessional model in particular.

the issue of thimerosal-containing vaccines as a possible cause of autistic spectrum disorders (asd) and neurodevelopmental disorders (ndds) has been a controversial topic since 1999. although most practitioners are familiar with the controversy, many are not familiar with the type or quality of evidence in published articles that have addressed this issue. to assess the quality of evidence assessing a potential association between thimerosal-containing vaccines and autism and evaluate whether that evidence suggests accepting or rejecting the hypothesis, we systematically reviewed published articles that report original data pertinent to the potential association between thimerosal-containing vaccines and asd/ndds. articles for analysis were identified in the national library of medicine's medline database using a pubmed search of the english-language literature for articles published between 1966 and 2004, using keywords thimerosal, thiomersal, mercury, methylmercury, or ethylmercury alone and combined with keywords autistic disorder, autistic spectrum disorder, and neurodevelopment. in addition, we used the "related links" option in pubmed and reviewed the reference sections in the identified articles. all original articles that evaluated an association between thimerosal-containing vaccines and asd/ndds or pharmacokinetics of ethylmercury in vaccines were included. twelve publications that met the selection criteria were identified by the literature search: 10 epidemiologic studies and 2 pharmacokinetic studies of ethylmercury. the design and quality of the studies showed significant variation. the preponderance of epidemiologic evidence does not support an association between thimerosal-containing vaccines and asd. epidemiologic studies that support an association are of poor quality and cannot be interpreted. pharmacokinetic studies suggest that the half-life of ethylmercury is significantly shorter when compared with methylmercury. studies do not demonstrate a link between thimerosal-containing vaccines and asd, and the pharmacokinetics of ethylmercury make such an association less likely. epidemiologic studies that support a link demonstrated significant design flaws that invalidate their conclusions. evidence does not support a change in the standard of practice with regard to administration of thimerosal-containing vaccines in areas of the world where they are used.

left ventricular outflow tract obstructive (lvoto) malformations are a leading cause of infant mortality from birth defects. genetic mechanisms are likely, and there may be a higher rate of asymptomatic lvoto anomalies in relatives of affected children. this study sought to define the incidence of cardiac anomalies in first-degree relatives of children with congenital aortic valve stenosis (avs), coarctation of the aorta (coa), and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (hlhs). a total of 113 probands with a nonsyndromic lvoto malformation of avs (n = 25), bav (n = 3), coa (n = 52), hlhs (n = 30), and aortic hypoplasia with mitral valve atresia (n = 2) were ascertained through chart review or enrolled at the time of diagnosis. echocardiography was performed on 282 asymptomatic first-degree relatives. four studies had poor acoustic windows, leaving 278 studies for analysis. bav were found in 13 (4.68%) first-degree relatives. the relative risk of bav in the relatives was 5.05 (95% confidence interval: 2.2-11.7), and the broad sense heritability was 0.49, based on a general population frequency of 0.9%. bav was more common in multiplex families compared with sporadic cases. an additional 32 relatives had anomalies of the aorta, aortic valve, left ventricle, or mitral valve. the presence of an lvoto lesion greatly increases the risk of identifying bav in a parent or sibling, providing additional support for a complex genetic cause. the parents and siblings of affected patients should be screened by echocardiography as the presence of an asymptomatic bav may carry a significant long-term health risk.

diagnosing inflicted traumatic brain injury (tbi) in young children is difficult in practice. comparisons of children with inflicted and noninflicted tbi may help to identify markers of inflicted tbi. the objective of this study was to compare inflicted and noninflicted tbi in terms of presenting complaints, clinical features, and hospital outcomes. the presenting complaint, clinical finding, hospital course, and outcome of all children who were aged 2 years or younger in north carolina and were admitted to a pediatric intensive care unit or died with a tbi in 2000 and 2001 were reviewed. clinical presentation and injury types were compared between children with inflicted and noninflicted tbi. risk ratios were used to compare clinical and outcome characteristics between the 2 groups. among survivors, multivariate binomial regression was used to examine the adjusted risk of a poor outcome dependent on injury type. a total of 80 (52.6%) children had inflicted and 72 (47.3%) children had noninflicted tbi. children with noninflicted tbi (not in a motor vehicle crash) were more likely to present to the emergency department asymptomatic (44.8% vs 8.3%) and to have a specific history of trauma than children with inflicted tbi. retinal hemorrhage, metaphyseal fracture, rib fracture, and subdural hemorrhage were more commonly found in children with inflicted compared with noninflicted tbi. skeletal survey and ophthalmologic examination combined would have missed 8 (10.0%) inflicted tbi cases. manner of presentation and injury types are helpful in distinguishing inflicted tbi. clinicians should not rule out inflicted tbi on the basis of skeletal survey and ophthalmoscopy alone but should proceed to computed tomography and/or magnetic resonance imaging.

there is an established link between exposure to mercury and impaired childhood cognitive development and early motor skills. thimerosal (also known as thiomersal), a preservative used in a number of children's vaccines, contains ethylmercury (an organic compound of mercury), and there has been concern that this exposure to mercury may be of some detriment to young children. the aim of this research was to test in a large united kingdom population-based cohort whether there is any evidence to justify such concerns. we used population data from a longitudinal study on childhood health and development. the study has been monitoring >14,000 children who are from the geographic area formerly known as avon, united kingdom, and were delivered in 1991-1992. the age at which doses of thimerosal-containing vaccines were administered was recorded, and measures of mercury exposure by 3, 4, and 6 months of age were calculated and compared with a number of measures of childhood cognitive and behavioral development covering the period from 6 to 91 months of age. contrary to expectation, it was common for the unadjusted results to suggest a beneficial effect of thimerosal exposure. for example, exposure at 3 months was inversely associated with hyperactivity and conduct problems at 47 months; motor development at 6 months and at 30 months; difficulties with sounds at 81 months; and speech therapy, special needs, and "statementing" at 91 months. after adjustment for birth weight, gestation, gender, maternal education, parity, housing tenure, maternal smoking, breastfeeding, and ethnic origins, we found 1 result of 69 to be in the direction hypothesized-poor prosocial behavior at 47 months was associated with exposure by 3 months of age (odds ratio: 1.12; 95% confidence interval: 1.01-1.23) compared with 8 results that still supported a beneficial effect. we could find no convincing evidence that early exposure to thimerosal had any deleterious effect on neurologic or psychological outcome.

the incidence of pediatric stroke was estimated to be 2.5 to 2.7 cases per 100,000 children per year in north america and 13 cases per 100,000 children per year in france. stroke is among the top 10 causes of death among children in the united states, with the highest incidence in the first 1 year of life. the annual mortality rate was 0.34 deaths per 100,000 person-years, with an average of 244 deaths per year. interethnic differences have been demonstrated to be important in pediatric stroke. however, most population-based studies on pediatric stroke were from europe or north america, and there was a lack of data on the incidence of stroke among chinese or asian children. whether the etiologic patterns and risk factors for death and morbidity among chinese children with stroke were similar to those described for other ethnic groups was unknown. to calculate the incidence of stroke among chinese children in hong kong and to examine the clinical spectrum, causes, patterns, risk factors, and outcomes of pediatric stroke among chinese subjects. the population of hong kong was 6.7 million in 2001, and >98% of our population is chinese in origin. in hong kong, public hospitals under the hospital authority provide >95% of the hospital service for the region. we identified children (>1 month to <15 years of age) who were admitted and given a discharge diagnosis of stroke from the clinical data analysis and reporting system, which is a centralized computerized database for all public hospitals. the discharge coding of stroke used codes from the international classification of diseases, 9th revision, clinical modification. only first admissions during the study period were included. we excluded any subsequent admissions by using multiple demographic characteristics of the patients. the incidence of pediatric stroke was estimated as the number of first hospitalizations divided by the person-years at risk. since 1991, we had been collecting a database on pediatric stroke (ages of 1 month to 16 years) from a single center (the university-affiliated pediatric unit). the clinical presentation, causes, risk factors, and outcomes for those in the hong kong children's stroke registry with follow-up data for > or =2 years were analyzed. data on outcomes, in terms of survival and neurologic deficits, were studied. for survivors, neurologic deficits were defined as short-term if they resolved within 3 months and long-term if they persisted for >3 months. the severity of deficits was defined as mild when function was minimally affected and the patient remained independent in activities of daily living, moderate when the patient required supervision or partial assistance in activities of daily living or when the deficit caused delay in developmental milestones, and severe when the patient required total or near-total care in activities of daily living. potential risk factors for death and poor neurologic outcomes, including gender, age at the time of stroke, clinical presentation, causes, and neuroimaging findings, were analyzed. using projections from census data in 2001, the number of children <15 years of age in hong kong from 1998 to 2001 was estimated to be 1,104100 to 1,158800, resulting in 4,545300 person-years. during the same period, 94 children with discharge coding of stroke were identified. therefore, the estimated incidence of pediatric stroke between 1998 and 2001 was 2.1 cases per 100,000 children-years. the average number of new cases treated annually was 4.5 (0-15 cases/year). fifty children (28 boys and 22 girls; male/female ratio: 1.27:1) were identified in the 11-year period. the mean age at presentation was 5.6 +/- 4.9 years. thirty-six strokes (72%) were ischemic and 14 (28%) were hemorrhagic. despite evaluation for possible underlying causes, 12% (6 cases) remained idiopathic. eighteen patients with ischemic strokes had cerebral thrombosis, whereas 15 had cerebral embolism. we did not observe any case of sinovenous thrombosis. the 36 cases of ischemic stroke were subtyped according to vascular territories. eleven cases had infarction involving the middle cerebral artery territory; 2 were limited to the cortical region, 3 were limited to subcortical structures such as the basal ganglia or internal capsule or both, and 6 had complete middle cerebral artery involvement, with cortical and subcortical stroke. involvement of the anterior cerebral artery occurred in 2 cases, with involvement of cerebellar/basilar artery territories in another 2 cases. the remaining 15 cases had multiple sites of infarction. three patients experienced secondary hemorrhagic transformation after the initial thrombotic event. of the 14 patients with hemorrhagic strokes, only 1 had subarachnoid hemorrhage. all others had intracerebral bleeding, at single (n = 9) or multiple (n = 4) loci. important causes included complications related to congenital heart diseases (n = 15, 30%), vascular diseases (n = 13, 26%), and hematologic diseases (n = 14, 28%). six cases had no determined causes. one case involved mitochondrial encephalopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes and constituted the only case with a metabolic cause. for the 7 patients for whom prothrombotic screening was performed, findings were negative. seizures (52%) and hemiplegia (34%) were the most common presenting features. other presenting clinical features included headaches (22%), decreased consciousness (30%), visual field defects (12%), dysphasia (10%), and lethargy (8%). only 1 patient, with moyamoya disease, had a family history of stroke. the median follow-up time was 8.7 years (range: 2-12.4 years). nine patients (18%) died, 5 with ischemic stroke and 4 with hemorrhagic stroke. among the 5 cases of death with ischemic stroke, 3 involved hemorrhagic transformation before death. seven patients (77%) died within 31 days (range: 2-31 days), whereas the other 2 died 6 months and 2.5 years after the episode. recurrence occurred in 5 cases (10%). long-term neurologic deficits occurred among 41% of survivors, including mental retardation (n = 11), epilepsy (n = 7), and hemiplegia (n = 10). the functional deficits were classified as severe in 7 cases, moderate in 3 cases, and mild in 7 cases, for patients with long-term neurologic deficits. decreased levels of consciousness, hematologic causes, and hemorrhagic transformation (applicable only in ischemic stroke) were significant risk factors associated with high mortality rates. for the 41 patients who survived, the only significant risk factor for long-term neurologic deficits was seizures at the initial presentation. other factors, such as gender, age, other clinical features, stroke type, vascular territory, other causes, and recurrence of stroke, were all insignificant for both death and long-term deficits. the 3 risk factors identified for death were analyzed in multivariate logistic regression analyses, with adjustment for the confounding variables, and only decreased levels of consciousness remained significant (odds ratio = 15.6). the incidence of stroke among chinese children was slightly lower than that in europe or north america. the etiologic pattern was different in our cohort, and there was no sickle cell anemia, thrombophilia, or sinovenous thrombosis. despite these differences, however, mortality and long-term neurologic deficit rates were similar.

there is a recent trend of a worldwide increase in the incidence of autistic spectrum disorder. early identification and intervention have proved to be beneficial. the original version of the checklist for autism in toddlers (chat) was a simple screening tool for identification of autistic children at 18 months of age in the united kingdom. children with an absence of joint attention (including protodeclarative pointing and gaze monitoring) and pretend play at 18 months were at high risk of autism. section a of the chat was a self-administered questionnaire for parents, with 9 yes/no questions addressing the following areas of child development: rough and tumble play, social interest, motor development, social play, pretend play, protoimperative pointing (pointing to ask for something), protodeclarative pointing, functional play, and showing. section b of the chat consisted of 5 items, which were recorded with observation of the children by general practitioners or health visitors. the 5 items addressed the child's eye contact, ability to follow a point (gaze monitoring), pretend (pretend play), produce a point (protodeclarative pointing), and make a tower of blocks. a 6-year follow-up study of >16,000 children screened with the chat at 18 months in the united kingdom showed a sensitivity of only 0.40 and a specificity of 0.98, with a positive predictive value (ppv) of 0.26. rescreening using the same instrument at 19 months for those who failed the 18-month screening yielded a higher ppv of 0.75. therefore, children were likely to have autism if they failed the chat at 18 months and failed again at 19 months. it was estimated that consistent failure in 3 key questions (ie, protodeclarative pointing, gaze monitoring, and pretend play) at 18 months indicated an 83.3% risk of having autism. because of the poor sensitivity of the original chat for autism, a modified checklist for autism in toddlers (m-chat), consisting of 23 questions, with 9 questions from the original chat and an additional 14 questions addressing core symptoms present among young autistic children, was designed in the united states. the original observational part (ie, section b) was omitted. the m-chat was designed as a simple, self-administered, parental questionnaire for use during regular pediatric visits. the more questions children failed, the higher their risk of having autism. two criteria were used to measure the sensitivity and specificity of m-chat. criterion 1 used any 3 of the 23 questions, and criterion 2 used 2 of the 6 best questions that could be used to discriminate autism from other groups. the sensitivity and specificity for criterion 1 were 0.97 and 0.95 and those for criterion 2 were 0.95 and 0.99, respectively. m-chat had a better sensitivity than the original chat, because children up to 24 months of age were screened, with the aim of identifying those who might regress between 18 and 24 months. the 6 best questions of the m-chat addressed areas of social relatedness (interest in other children and imitation), joint attention (protodeclarative pointing and gaze monitoring), bringing objects to show parents, and responses to calling. joint attention was addressed in the original chat, whereas the other areas were addressed only in the m-chat. to date, there has been no study of the application of either the original chat or the m-chat for chinese populations. chat-23 is a new checklist translated into chinese, combining the m-chat (23 questions) with graded scores and section b (observational section) of the chat. we aimed to determine whether chat-23 could discriminate autism at mental ages of 18 to 24 months for chinese children and to determine the best combination of questions to identify autism. a cross-sectional cohort study was performed with 212 children with mental ages of 18 to 24 months. the children were categorized into 2 groups, ie, group 1 (n = 87) (autistic disorder: n = 53; pervasive developmental disorder: n = 33) and group 2 (n = 125) (nonautistic). the checklist included self-ad25) (nonautistic). the checklist included self-administered questionnaires with 23 questions (part a) and direct observations of 5 items by trained investigators (part b). we performed discriminant function analysis to we found that 7 key questions, addressing areas of joint attention, pretend play, social relatedness, and social referencing, were identified as discriminative for autism. for part a, failing any 2 of 7 key questions, ie, question 13 (does your child imitate you? [eg, you make a face; will your child imitate it?]), question 5 (does your child ever pretend, for example, to talk on the phone or take care of dolls, or pretend other things?), question 7 (does your child ever use his/her index finger to point, to indicate interest in something?), question 23 (does your child look at your face to check your reaction when faced with something unfamiliar?), question 9 (does your child ever bring objects over to you [parent] to show you something?), question 15 (if you point at a toy across the room, does your child look at it?), and question 2 (does your child take an interest in other children?), yielded sensitivity of 0.931 and specificity of 0.768. failing any 6 of all 23 questions produced sensitivity of 0.839 and specificity of 0.848. for part b, failing any 2 of 4 items produced sensitivity of 0.736, specificity of 0.912, and ppv of 0.853. the 4 observational items were as follows: item b1: during the appointment, has the child made eye contact with you? item b2: does the child look across to see what you are pointing at? item b3: does the child pretend to pour out tea, drink it, etc?; item b4: does the child point with his/her index finger at the light? we found that integrating the screening questions of the m-chat (from the united states) and observational section b of the original chat (from the united kingdom) yielded high sensitivity and specificity in discriminating autism at 18 to 24 months of age for our chinese cohort. this new screening instrument (chat-23) is simple to administer. we found that a 2-stage screening program for autism can offer a cost-effective method for early detection of autism at 18 to 24 months. for chat-23, use of both the parental questionnaire and direct observation and use of the criterion of failing any 2 of 7 key questions yielded the highest sensitivity but a relatively lower specificity, whereas use of part b yielded the highest specificity but a lower sensitivity. we recommend identifying the possible positive cases with part a (parental questionnaire) and then proceeding to part b (observation) with trained assessors. the proposed algorithm for screening for autism is as follows. 1) the parents or chief caretakers complete a 23-item questionnaire when their children are 18 to 24 months of age. 2) the parents mail, fax, or hand this 23-item questionnaire to the local child health agency. 3) clerical staff members check for and score failure, with the criteria of failing any 2 of 7 key questions or failing any 6 of 23 questions; if either criterion is met, then the staff members highlight the medical records of the suspicious cases. 4) trained child health care professionals observe the children who failed any 2 of 7 key questions or any 6 of 23 questions. these identified patients are observed for 5 minutes for part b of the chat-23. 5) any child who fails any 2 of 4 items requires direct referral to a comprehensive autism evaluation team, for early diagnostic evaluation and early intervention. the high sensitivity and specificity of the criteria observed in our study suggested that chat-23 might be used to differentiate children with autism. additional international collaboration with the use of the chat, m-chat, and chat-23 could provide more prospective epidemiologic data, to establish whether there is a genuine increase in the worldwide incidence of autism.

several guidelines have been published for the care of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd); however, few data describe adoption of practice guidelines. our study sought 1) to describe primary care diagnosis and management of adhd, 2) to determine whether the care is in accordance with american academy of pediatrics (aap) practice guidelines, and 3) to describe factors associated with guideline adherence. we conducted a mail survey of 1374 primary care physicians in michigan. main outcome measures were reported adherence to practices specified in the aap guidelines; adhd practice patterns; and other measures, including attitudes about parent, teacher, and community influences on adhd diagnosis and treatment. bivariate and multivariate analyses were performed to assess patient and physician factors associated with adherence to guideline components. the overall response rate was 60%. the majority (77.4%) of primary care physicians were familiar with aap guidelines on adhd, and many (61.1%) reported incorporating the guidelines into their practice. differences were apparent by specialty: 91.5% of pediatricians were familiar with the guidelines in contrast to 59.8% of family physicians. the majority of clinicians reported practices consistent with individual components of the diagnostic and treatment guidelines. however, when adherence to multiple components was analyzed together, only 25.8% of clinicians reported routine use of all 4 diagnostic components in the survey. in addition, some physicians continue to use diagnostic modalities that are currently not recommended for routine evaluation of school-aged children with adhd--continuous performance testing, neuroimaging, and laboratory tests (eg, thyroid, lead, or iron testing). with regard to adhd treatment, the majority (66.6%) of respondents reported routine recommendation of pharmacotherapy and titration of medications in the first month when prescribed (81.3%). however, just over half (53.1%) reported routine follow-up visits (3-4 times per year) for children who have adhd and are taking medications. most (53.4%) clinicians also recommended behavioral therapy for children who had a diagnosis of adhd. patterns of specialty differences were less consistent for treatment components: pediatricians were more likely to recommend medications, but family physicians reported more frequent follow-up evaluations for children who receive medications. there were no specialty differences in recommendations for behavioral therapy. in addition to physician specialty variations, differences in management were apparent by practice type and other demographic characteristics. there were few significant associations between adherence to guideline components and physician attitudes about parent, teacher, or community influences. however, these factors were noted by many respondents. only 32.5% agreed that their community had adequate, accessible mental health resources. half (50.1%) of the physicians reported that insurers limit coverage for assessment and treatment of adhd. primary care physicians generally report awareness of pediatric adhd guidelines and follow these clinical practice recommendations. however, some physician variations are apparent, and areas for improvement are noted. many primary care physicians report poor access to mental health services, limited insurance coverage, and other potential system barriers to the delivery of adhd care. additional study is needed to confirm provider-reported data; to determine what constitutes high-quality, long-term management of this chronic condition; and to confirm how reported practices associate with long-term outcomes for children with adhd.

the special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children (wic) is the largest food supplement program in the united states, serving almost 7 500 000 participants in 2002. because the program is a grant program, rather than an entitlement program, congress is not mandated to allocate funds to serve all eligible participants. little is known about the effects of wic on infant growth, health, and food security. to examine associations between wic participation and indicators of underweight, overweight, length, caregiver-perceived health, and household food security among infants < or =12 months of age, at 6 urban hospitals and clinics. a multisite study with cross-sectional surveys administered at urban medical centers in 5 states and washington, dc, from august 1998 though december 2001. a total of 5923 wic-eligible caregivers of infants < or =12 months of age were interviewed at hospital clinics and emergency departments. weight-for-age, length-for-age, weight-for-length, caregiver's perception of infant's health, and household food security. ninety-one percent of wic-eligible families were receiving wic assistance. of the eligible families not receiving wic assistance, 64% reported access problems and 36% denied a need for wic. the weight and length of wic assistance recipients, adjusted for age and gender, were consistent with national normative values. with control for potential confounding family variables (site, housing subsidy, employment status, education, and receipt of food stamps or temporary assistance for needy families) and infant variables (race/ethnicity, birth weight, months breastfed, and age), infants who did not receive wic assistance because of access problems were more likely to be underweight (weight-for-age z score = -0.23 vs 0.009), short (length-for-age z score = -0.23 vs -0.02), and perceived as having fair or poor health (adjusted odds ratio: 1.92; 95% confidence interval: 1.29-2.87), compared with wic assistance recipients. rates of overweight, based on weight-for-length of >95th percentile, varied from 7% to 9% and did not differ among the 3 groups but were higher than the 5% expected from national growth charts. rates of food insecurity were consistent with national data for minority households with children. families that did not receive wic assistance because of access problems had higher rates of food insecurity (28%) than did wic participants (23%), although differences were not significant after covariate control. caregivers who did not perceive a need for wic services had more economic and personal resources than did wic participants and were less likely to be food-insecure, but there were no differences in infants' weight-for-age, perceived health, or overweight between families that did not perceive a need for wic services and those that received wic assistance. infants < or =12 months of age benefit from wic participation. health care providers should promote wic utilization for eligible families and advocate that wic receive support to reduce waiting lists and eliminate barriers that interfere with access.

this study reports the epidemiologic features, survival rates, and neurologic outcomes of the largest population-based series of pediatric out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest patients with prospectively collected data. secondary analysis of data from a prospective, interventional trial of out-of-hospital pediatric airway management conducted from 1994 to 1997 (gausche m, lewis rj, stratton sj, et al. jama. 2000;283:783-790). consecutive out-of-hospital patients from 2 large urban counties in california <12 years old or 40 kg in bodyweight who were determined by paramedics to be pulseless and apneic were included. main outcome measures included survival to hospital discharge, patient demographics, arrest etiology, arrest rhythm, event intervals, and neurologic outcomes. in 599 patients, 601 events were studied (54% were <1 year old, 58% were male). return of spontaneous circulation was achieved in 29%; 25% were admitted to the hospital, and 8.6% (51) survived to hospital discharge. the most prevalent etiologies were sudden infant death syndrome and trauma; these resulted in relatively higher mortality. respiratory etiologies and submersions followed; these resulted in relatively lower mortality. twenty-six percent of the arrests were witnessed by citizens, and an additional 8% were witnessed by rescue personnel. witnessed arrests had a higher survival rate (16%). thirty-one percent of patients received bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation, which was not demonstrated to result in improved survival rates. arrest rhythms were asystole (67%), pulseless electrical activity (24%), and ventricular fibrillation (9%); children with the latter 2 rhythms had better survival rates. one third of the survivors (16 of 51) had good neurologic outcome, none of whom received >3 doses of epinephrine or were resuscitated for >31 minutes in the emergency department. the 8.6% survival rate after out-of-hospital pediatric cardiopulmonary arrest is poor. administration of >3 doses of epinephrine or prolonged resuscitation is futile.

medical errors cause significant morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients. specialty-based, voluntary reporting of medical errors by health care providers is an important strategy that may enhance patient safety. we developed a voluntary, anonymous, internet-based reporting system for medical errors in neonatal intensive care, evaluated its feasibility, and identified errors that affect high-risk neonates and their families. health professionals (n = 739) from 54 hospitals in the vermont oxford network received access to a secure internet site for anonymous reporting of errors, near-miss errors, and adverse events. reports used free-text entry in phase 1 (17 months) and a structured form in phase 2 (10 months). the number and types of reported events and factors that contributed to the events were measured. of 1230 reports--522 in phase 1 (17 months) and 708 in phase 2 (10 months)--the most frequent event categories were wrong medication, dose, schedule, or infusion rate (including nutritional agents and blood products; 47%); error in administration or method of using a treatment (14%); patient misidentification (11%); other system failure (9%); error or delay in diagnosis (7%); and error in the performance of an operation, procedure, or test (4%). the most frequent contributory factors were failure to follow policy or protocol (47%), inattention (27%), communications problem (22%), error in charting or documentation (13%), distraction (12%), inexperience (10%), labeling error (10%), and poor teamwork (9%). in 24 reports, family members assisted in discovery, contributed to the cause, or themselves were victims of the error. serious patient harm was reported in 2% and minor harm in 25% of phase 2 events. specialty-based, voluntary, anonymous internet reporting by health care professionals identified a broad range of medical errors in neonatal intensive care and promoted multidisciplinary collaborative learning. similar specialty-based systems have the potential to enhance patient safety in a variety of clinical settings.

multiple cross-sectional physician surveys have documented poor cardiac auscultation skills. we evaluated the impact of 2 different educational interventions on pediatric resident auscultation skills. the auscultation skills of all first-year (pgy1; n = 20) and second-year pediatric residents (pgy2; n = 20) were evaluated at the beginning and end of the academic year. five patient recordings were presented: atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary valve stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve with insufficiency, and innocent murmur. residents were asked to classify the second heart sound, identify a systolic ejection click, describe the murmur, and provide a diagnosis. all pgy1 and most pgy2 (14 of 20) participated on the inpatient cardiology service for 1 month. pgy2 on the cardiology service also attended outpatient clinic. pgy1 did not attend outpatient clinic but were allotted 2 hours/week to use a self-directed cardiac auscultation computer teaching program. resident auscultation skills on initial evaluation were dependent on training level (pgy1: 42 +/- 15% correct; pgy2: 53 +/- 13% correct), primarily as a result of better classification of second heart sound (pgy1: 45%; pgy2: 63%) and diagnosis of an innocent murmur (pgy1: 35%; pgy2: 65%). there was no difference in the ability to identify correctly a systolic ejection click (20% vs 23%) or to arrive at the correct diagnosis (35% vs 40%). at the end of the academic year, the pgy1 scores improved by 21%, primarily as a result of improved diagnostic accuracy of the innocent murmur (35% to 65%). pgy2 scores remained unchanged (53% vs 51%), regardless of participation in a cardiology rotation (cardiology rotation: 50%; no cardiology rotation: 51%). combined, diagnostic accuracy was best for ventricular septal defect (55%) and innocent murmur (60%) and worst for atrial septal defect (18%) and pulmonary valve stenosis (15%). however, 40% identified the innocent murmur as pathologic and 21% of pathologic murmurs were diagnosed as innocent. pediatric resident auscultation skills were poor and did not improve after an outpatient cardiology rotation. auscultation skills did improve after the use of a self-directed cardiac auscultation teaching program. these data have relevance given the american college of graduate medical education's emphasis on measuring educational outcomes and documenting clinical competencies during residency training.

to investigate the association between faltering growth in children and maternal postnatal depression. children aged < or =2 years were identified from community child health surveillance records if their weights fell across 2 centile channels on standardized growth charts or fell below the second centile. mothers of these index children were invited to complete the edinburgh postnatal depression scale and the anxiety subscale of the hospital anxiety and depression scale. those who scored above threshold values on either scale were interviewed with the revised clinical interview schedule. matched control children were obtained from health visitor records, and records of their weights were obtained. mothers of control children completed the same questionnaires. a total of 196 index children and 567 control children were studied. significantly more mothers in the index group scored above the threshold for both the edinburgh postnatal depression scale (33% vs 22%; odds ratio [or]: 1.71; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.16-2.53) and the hospital anxiety and depression scale (24% vs 13%; or: 2.08; 95% ci: 1.33-3.25) questionnaires. furthermore, clinical interviews with these mothers demonstrated that 21% of the index group and 11% of the control group fulfilled criteria for depressive episode (or: 1.88; 95% ci: 1.21-2.94). depression in mothers of children with faltering growth during the first 2 years of life is significantly greater than in mothers of children who are gaining weight appropriately. in view of the high rates of maternal depression in children with poor weight gain, clinical management at presentation of either problem should focus on both members of the mother-child dyad and on the interaction between mother and child. these findings have implications for all professionals who work in primary and secondary health care.

maurice raynaud first described the vasospasm of arterioles in 1862, and raynaud's phenomenon is now felt to be common, affecting up to 20% of women of childbearing age. raynaud's phenomenon has been reported to affect the nipples of breastfeeding mothers and is recognized by many lactation experts as a treatable cause of painful breastfeeding. in 1997, lawlor-smith and lawlor-smith reported 5 women with raynaud's phenomenon associated with breastfeeding, but there are few other case reports, and none report the possible relationship between raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple and previous breast surgery. we report 12 women who breastfed 14 infants, all of whom were seen in 1 pediatric practice and 1 lactation consultation center in san francisco, california, within the past 3 years. of the 12 women, 11 were seen between june 2002 and may 2003. all women suffered from extremely painful breastfeeding, with symptoms precipitated by cold temperatures and associated with blanching of the nipple followed by cyanosis and/or erythema. poor positioning and poor attachment or latch may cause blanching of the nipple and pain during breastfeeding, but 10 of the 12 mothers were evaluated by experienced lactation consultations, who were sure that inappropriate breastfeeding techniques were not contributing factors. because the breast pain associated with raynaud's phenomenon is so severe and throbbing, it is often mistaken for candida albicans infection. it is not unusual for mothers who have raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple to be treated inappropriately and often repeatedly for c albicans infections with topical or systemic antifungal agents. eight of our 12 mothers and their infants received multiple courses of antifungal therapy without relief before the diagnosis was made. to diagnose raynaud's phenomenon accurately, additional symptoms such as precipitation by cold stimulus, occurrence of symptoms during pregnancy or when not breastfeeding, and biphasic or triphasic color changes must be present. all our mothers experienced precipitation of symptoms by cold stimuli and demonstrated biphasic or triphasic color changes, and 6 of the 12 experienced symptoms during pregnancy. interestingly 3 of 12 mothers also reported a history of breast surgery, including 1 mother who had a fibroadenoma removed and 2 who had breast-reduction surgery. the association between breast surgery/implants and autoimmune disease, including raynaud's phenomenon, has been discussed extensively, but the association of raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple during breastfeeding has not been reported previously. given the small numbers in the study, it is uncertain as to whether this may be a precipitating factor in developing raynaud's phenomenon. treatment options include methods to prevent or decrease cold exposure, avoidance of vasoconstrictive drugs/nicotine that could precipitate symptoms, and pharmacologic measures. there are reports in the lay press of the use of herbal medicines, aerobic exercise, and dietary supplements, but because most women with painful breastfeeding require immediate relief of the pain to continue breastfeeding successfully, it is important to offer a treatment plan that will alleviate the pain quickly. nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker, has been used to treat raynaud's phenomenon because of its vasodilatory effects. very little of the medication can be demonstrated in breast milk and thus is safe to use in breastfeeding mothers. of the 12 mothers in our series, 6 chose to use nifedipine, and all had prompt relief of pain. only 1 mother developed side effects from nifedipine. pediatricians and lactation consultants should be aware of this treatable cause of painful breastfeeding and should specifically question their patients, because most mothers will not provide this information to the breastfeeding consultant. prompt treatment will allow mothers to continue to breastfeed pain free while avoiding unnecessary antifungal therapy.

this study examines patterns of specialist use among children and adolescents by presence of a chronic condition or disability, insurance, and sociodemographic characteristics. cross-sectional analysis of national survey data, describing rates of specialist use, with logistic regressions to examine associations with having a chronic condition or disability, insurance status, and sociodemographic variables. the 1999 national health interview survey, a nationally representative household survey. children and adolescents 2 to 17 years old. parental/respondent reports of specialist visits based on reports of the child having seen or talked to a medical doctor who specializes in a particular medical disease or problem about the child's health during the last 12 months. thirteen percent of us children were reported as seeing a specialist in the past year. specialist-visit rates were twice as high for children with a chronic condition or disability (26% vs 10.2%). the specialist utilization rates for children without insurance were much lower than those for insured children, but among the children who have coverage (private, medicaid, or other), specialist-utilization rates were similar (no statistically significant difference). results of multivariate analyses predicting the use of specialists confirm the above-mentioned findings. additionally, they show that use of specialist care was lower among children in the middle age group, minorities, children in families between 100% and 200% of the federal poverty level, and lower parental educational levels. we found no difference in specialist-visit rates between rural- and urban-dwelling children, by family status, or by gender. differences in specialist use by gatekeeping status are found only among subgroups. the results showed that, overall, 13% of children used a specialist in a year. among the insured, a slightly greater percentage of children used such care (15%). these numbers were slightly lower than the 18% to 28% of pediatric patients referred per year in 5 us health plans, although the sources of data and definitions of specialist use differ. our results showed that 26% of children with a chronic condition or disability who were insured by medicaid use a specialist. although the data are not directly comparable, this is within the range of previous findings showing annual rates by condition of use between 24% and 59%. these findings are consistent also with greater use of many different types of health care by children with special health care needs. medicaid-utilization rates presented here were similar also to the rates found among privately insured children and children with "other" insurance. in our earlier work examining use of specialists by children insured by medicaid, we speculated that medicaid-insured children might face particular difficulty with access (eg, due to transportation or language barriers). the findings presented here suggest that children insured by medicaid had no different use of specialists than other insured children. we do not know, however, whether similar rates are appropriate. as predicted, sociodemographic differences were pronounced and followed patterns typically found for use of health services. lower rates of specialist use by non-hispanic blacks and hispanics remains even, controlling for chronic condition/disability, status, insurance, and socioeconomic status. this is an important issue that not only needs to be addressed in using specialist care but also in many areas in health care. it is the near poor who seem to have difficulty accessing care (as is evidenced by lower use of specialists). in a study of access to care, similar results were found, with those between 125% and 200% of the federal poverty level being less likely to have a usual source of care. this is roughly the population targeted by the state children's health insurance programs. these findings cannot determine whether rates of use are too high or too low. additional work on outcomes for children who do and do not use specialist care would further inform the work presented here. extending that work to examine patterns of care including but not limited to specialists and generalists would be even better.

more than 85% of children born today with chronic medical conditions will live to adulthood, and many should transfer from pediatric to adult health care. the numbers of adults with congenital heart defects (chds) are increasing rapidly. current guidelines recommend that just over half of adult chd patients should be seen every 12 to 24 months by a cardiologist with specific chd expertise at a regional chd center, because they are at risk for serious complications (eg, reoperation and/or arrhythmias) and premature mortality. the present study aimed to determine the percent of young adults with chds who successfully transferred from pediatric to adult care and examine correlates of successful transfer. cross-sectional study with prevalence data from an entire cohort. all patients (n = 360) aged 19 to 21 years with complex chds who, according to current practice guidelines, should be seen annually at a specialized adult chd center were identified from the database of the cardiology program at the hospital for sick children in toronto, canada, a pediatric tertiary care center. of these patients, 234 completed measures about health beliefs, health behaviors, and medical care since age 18 years. all 15 specialized adult chd centers in canada formed the canadian adult congenital heart (cach) network. attendance for at least 1 follow-up appointment at a cach center before the age of 22 years was ascertained for all eligible patients. attendance at a cach center provides a clear criterion for successful transfer. in the total cohort, 47% (95% confidence interval [ci]: 42-52) had transferred successfully to adult care. there was no difference in rates of successful transfer between patients consenting to complete questionnaires (48%) and those who declined (47%). more than one quarter (27%) of the patients reported having had no cardiac appointments since 18 years. in multivariate analyses of the entire cohort, successful transfer was significantly associated with more pediatric cardiovascular surgeries (odds ratio [or]: 2.47; 95% ci: 1.40-4.37), older age at last visit to the hospital for sick children (or: 1.29; 95% ci: 1.10-1.51), and documented recommendations in the medical chart for follow-up at a cach center. in multivariate analyses of the patients completing questionnaires, successful transfer was significantly related to documented recommendations and patient beliefs that adult chd care should be at a cach center (or: 3.64; 95% ci: 1.34-9.90). comorbid conditions (or: 3.13; 95% ci: 1.13-8.67), not using substances (eg, binge drinking; or: 0.18; 95% ci: 0.07-0.50), using dental antibiotic prophylaxis (or: 4.23; 95% ci: 1.48-12.06), and attending cardiac appointments without parents or siblings (or: 6.59; 95% ci: 1.61-27.00) also correlated with successful transfer. this is the first study to document the percent of young adults with a chronic illness who successfully transfer to adult care in a timely manner. patients were from an entire birth cohort from the largest pediatric cardiac center in canada, and outcome data were obtained on all eligible patients. similar data should be obtained for other chronic illnesses. there is need for considerable improvement in the numbers of young adults with chds who successfully transfer to adult care. at-risk adolescents with chds should begin the transition process before their teens, should be educated in the importance of antibiotic prophylaxis, should be contacted if a follow-up appointment is missed, and should be directed to a specific chd cardiologist or program, with the planned timing being stated explicitly. adult care needs to be discussed in the pediatric setting, and patients must acquire appropriate beliefs about adult care well before transfer. developmentally appropriate, staged discussions involving the patient, with and without parents, throughout adolescence may help patients acquire these beliefs and an understanding of the need for ongoing care. improved continuity of pediatric care and provision of clear details for adult follow-up might be sufficient to cause substantive improvements in successful transfer. an understanding of why patients drop out of pediatric care may be needed to improve the continuity of care throughout adolescence. almost one quarter of the patients believed adult care should be somewhere other than at a cach center despite opposite recommendations. for these patients, a single discussion of adult care during the final pediatric visit may be too little, too late. in addition to earlier discussions, multiple mechanisms such as referral letters and transition clinics are needed. similarly, patients engaging in multiple risky or poor health behaviors such as substance use may need more intensive programs to make substantial changes in these behaviors, which hopefully would lead to successful transfer. overall, these data support the view that transition to adult care (a planned process of discussing and preparing for transfer to an adult health center) is important and should begin well before patients are transferred. the future health of adults with chronic conditions may depend on our ability to make these changes.

to determine predictive factors for the presence of focal infiltrates in children with clinically suspected pneumonia in a pediatric emergency department. children (1-16 years) with clinically suspected pneumonia were studied prospectively. the presenting features were compared between the children with and without focal infiltrates using chi2 analysis, t test, and odds ratio with 95% confidence intervals. a multivariate prediction rule was developed using logistic regression. a total of 570 were studied. risk factors (odds ratio; 95% confidence interval) for the presence of focal infiltrates included history of fever (3.1; 1.7-5.3), decreased breath sounds (1.4; 1.0-2.0), crackles (2.0; 1.4-2.9), retractions (2.8; 1.0-7.6), grunting (7.3; 1.1-48.1), fever (1.5; 1.2-1.9), tachypnea (1.8; 1.3-2.5), and tachycardia (1.3; 1.0-1.6). we then used logistic regression to develop a candidate prediction rule for the variables of fever, decreased breath sounds, crackles, and tachypnea, which had an area under the receiver operating curve of 0.668. this rule had excellent sensitivity (93.1%-98%) yet poor specificity (5.7%-19.4%). multiple predictive factors for children with suspected pneumonia have been identified. patients with focal infiltrates were more likely in our study to have a history of fever, tachypnea, increased heart rate, retractions, grunting, crackles, or decreased breath sounds. a multivariate prediction rule shows promise for the accurate prediction of pneumonia in children. however, the prospective evaluation of this multivariate prediction rule in a clinical setting is still required.

magnetic resonance (mr) imaging of the neonate is important clinically, because this group of patients often has complex and multiple problems due to prematurity and developmental abnormalities. mr imaging usually involves moving neonates away from their controlled environment to the scanner. in this study we present the results of our initial experience with an mr-compatible incubator used on a 1.5-t system. seven neonates were imaged at 1.5 t without sedation or anesthesia. images were obtained by using single-shot fast spin echo, 3-dimensional fourier transfer gradient echo, and diffusion-weighted sequences. in 4 cases, time-of-flight angiography was performed. all 7 neonates were stable throughout the scan time (10-21 minutes). experienced observers graded the images for quality, and all were graded excellent or good. in no case was the image quality poor. neonates can be imaged safely by using an mr-compatible incubator and fast image sequences. this method should allow neonates to be imaged by mr in sites at which a dedicated neonatal mr scanner is not available.

discontinuation of life-sustaining interventions often raises ethical concerns. in cases of severe child abuse with poor prognosis for recovery, accused parents may have a conflict of interest regarding medical decision-making for their child, because the outcome of such decisions may impact legal charges filed against them. the recently issued american academy of pediatrics guidelines for addressing such cases recommended the appointment of a guardian ad litem for medical decision-making. we present the case of an 8-month-old infant who was abused severely by her father, resulting in a persistent vegetative state. we describe our experience with appointing a guardian ad litem and the ethical issues involved.

to assess the prevalence of unmet needs for routine and specialty care among children with special health care needs (cshcn) and to identify factors associated with the likelihood of having unmet need for medical care. data come from the respondents for 38 866 children interviewed for the national survey of children with special health care needs. bivariate analyses were used to assess differences in unmet need for medical care by various environmental, predisposing, enabling, and need factors. logit analyses were used to determine independent effects of these variables on the likelihood of having an unmet need for medical care. nationally, 74.4% and 51.0% of cshcn needed routine and subspecialty physician care, respectively. of those reporting that they needed routine care, 3.2% were unable to obtain these services. of those reporting a need for specialty care, 7.2% reported not obtaining all needed specialty care. the prevalence of unmet need for specialty care significantly exceeded the prevalence of unmet need for routine care. in logit analyses, african american children and children whose mothers had less than a high-school education faced twice the odds of having an unmet need for routine care. compared with nonpoor children, children living below the federal poverty level were significantly more likely to have an unmet need for routine (adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 1.97; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.23-3.14) and specialty (aor: 2.50; 95% ci: 1.49-4.18) care. near-poor children were also significantly more likely than nonpoor children to have unmet needs for routine and specialty care. uninsured children were significantly more likely than continuously insured children to report an unmet need for routine (aor: 7.51; 95% ci: 4.99-11.30) and specialty (aor: 4.29; 95% ci: 2.99-6.15) care. our findings also show that higher levels of general pediatrician supply, relative to the pediatric population, are associated with a significantly lower likelihood of having an unmet need for routine care. likewise, a greater supply of pediatric subspecialists is associated with a decreased likelihood of having an unmet need for specialty care. compared with previous reports of the general pediatric population, cshcn have higher levels of unmet need for medical services. our regression results emphasize that children vulnerable because of their social circumstances (eg, poverty, etc) have significantly greater odds of having unmet need for routine and specialty physician care. furthermore, our findings highlight the importance of insurance coverage in ensuring access to needed routine and specialty medical services.

although one third of young adults in the united states are uninsured, lack of insurance in this age group has been the subject of few published studies. because opportunities to obtain public and private insurance are likely to differ for men and women, the objective of this study was to describe the gender-specific relationship of sociodemographic variables and lack of insurance among young adults. we examined data for 6884 young adults (aged 19-24 years) who completed the sample adult questionnaire of the national health interview survey for 1998, 1999, and 2000. gender-stratified multiple logistic regression was used to estimate the odds of being uninsured associated with race/ethnicity, household income, major activity in the previous week, marital status, and pregnancy (women). overall, 32% of male participants and 27% of female participants reported being uninsured at the time of the survey. uninsured men outnumbered insured men in several sociodemographic categories, including hispanic men (58% uninsured), men not attending high school (85%), and men employed in a workplace that did not offer health insurance (51%). high rates of uninsurance were reported by women not attending high school (65%), hispanic women (46%), those who were keeping house (41%), and women with a household income between 10 000 dollars and 20 000 dollars (41%). in multiple logistic regression models, many of the sociodemographic variables studied were similarly correlated with health insurance for both men and women. employment in a workplace where the young adult was not offered health insurance coverage, low household income, low educational attainment, and hispanic ethnicity were associated with increased odds of being uninsured for both genders. having attended college, higher household income, and being a student or employed in a workplace that offers health insurance coverage were associated with lower odds of being uninsured for both genders. this study suggests that additional opportunities for health insurance coverage are needed for young adults-particularly men, hispanics, and those in low- and middle-income households. increasing the availability of employment-based health insurance, discouraging attrition from primary and secondary education, and the creation of insurance opportunities for minorities and near-poor and middle-income households are potentially important target areas for programs that seek to reduce the number of uninsured young adults.

little is known about how depressive symptoms in mothers affects illness management in inner-city children with asthma. our goal was to determine how maternal depressive symptoms influence child medication adherence, impact of the child's asthma on the mother, and maternal attitudes and beliefs. baseline and 6-month surveys were administered to 177 mothers of young minority children with asthma in inner-city baltimore, md and washington, dc. medication adherence, disruptiveness of asthma, and select attitudes toward illness and asthma therapy were measured. six-month data (n = 158) were used to prospectively evaluate long-term symptom control and emergency department use. independent variables included asthma morbidity, age, depressive symptoms, and other psychosocial data. no difference in child asthma morbidity was observed between mothers high and low in depressive symptoms. however, mothers with high depressive symptoms reported significantly more problems with their child using inhalers properly (odds ratio [or]: 5.0; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.3-18.9) and forgetting doses (or: 4.2; 95% ci: 1.4-12.4). depressive symptoms were also associated with greater emotional distress and interference with daily activities caused by the child's asthma, along with less confidence in asthma medications, ability to control asthma symptoms, and self-efficacy to cope with acute asthma episodes. in addition, depressed mothers reported less understanding about their child's medications and use (or: 7.7; 95% ci: 1.7-35.9). baseline asthma morbidity, maternal depression scores, and family income were independently associated with asthma symptoms 6 months later, whereas medication adherence was not predictive of subsequent asthma morbidity or emergency department use. maternal depressive symptoms were not associated with child asthma morbidity but were associated with a constellation of beliefs and attitudes that may significantly influence adherence to asthma medications and illness management. identifying and addressing poor psychological adjustment in mothers is important when developing a child's asthma treatment and may facilitate parent-provider communication, medication adherence, and asthma management among inner-city children.

the movement to measure medical care quality has been accelerating, spurred on by evidence of poor quality of care and trials of interventions to improve care. appropriate measurement of quality of care is an essential aspect of improving the quality of care, yet some quality measures may be influenced by patients' attributes unrelated to quality of care. risk adjustment is the term commonly applied to those methods that account for patient-related attributes, making measurement of health care quality as comparable as possible across providers or organizations seeing different mixes of patients. the measurement of quality of care for children poses specific challenges. in addition to these measurement challenges, analysts must ensure that quality comparisons among doctors, groups of doctors, hospitals, or health plans are not adversely affected by the likelihood that different types of patients seek care in different places. although some techniques designed to adjust performance measures for case mix were developed for both adults and children, other systems are specific to childhood circumstances. the theoretical issues involved in risk-adjusting childhood outcomes measures for newborns in the neonatal intensive care unit were reviewed recently. here, we go beyond the neonatal intensive care unit setting to consider risk adjustment for pediatric quality measures more broadly. in particular, we 1) review the conceptual background for risk-adjusting quality measures, 2) present policy issues related to adjusting pediatric quality measures, and 3) catalog existing risk-adjustment methodologies for pediatric quality measures. we conclude with an overall assessment of the status of risk adjustment for pediatric quality measures and recommendations for additional research and application.

the ability to measure and improve the quality of children's health care is of national importance. despite the existence of numerous health care quality measures, the collective ability of measures to assess children's health care quality is unclear. a review of existing health care quality measures for children is timely for both assessing the current state of quality measures for children and identifying areas requiring additional research and development. to identify and collect current health care quality measures for child health and then to systematically categorize and classify measures and identify gaps in child health care quality measures requiring additional development. we first identified child health care quality instruments with assistance from staff at the agency for healthcare research and quality, experts in the field, the computerized needs-oriented quality measurement evaluation system, the child and adolescent health measurement initiative, and a medical literature review. from these instruments, we then selected clinical performance measures applicable to children (aged 0-18 years). we categorized the individual measures into the institute of medicine's framework for the national health care quality report. the framework includes health care quality domains (patient safety, effectiveness, patient-centeredness, and timeliness) and patient-perspective domains (staying healthy, getting better, living with illness, and end-of-life care). we then determined the balance of the measures (how well they assess care for all children versus children with special health care needs) and their comprehensiveness (how well the measures apply to the developmental range of children). finally, we analyzed the ability of the measures to assess equity in care. we identified 19 measure sets, and 396 individual measures were used to assess children's health care quality. the distribution of measures in the health care quality domains was: safety, 14.4%; effectiveness, 59.1%; patient-centeredness, 32.1%; and timeliness, 33.3%. the distribution of measures in the patient-perspective domains was: staying healthy, 24%; getting better, 40.2%; living with illness, 17.4%; end of life, 0%; and multidimensional, 23.5% (measures were multidimensional if they applied to >1 domain). most of the measures were meant for use in the general pediatric population (81.1%), with a significant proportion designed for children with special health care needs (18.9%). the majority (>or=79%) of the measures could be applied to children across all age groups. however, there were relatively few measures designed specifically for each developmental stage. regarding the use of measures to study equity in health care, 6 of the measure sets have been used in previous studies of equity. all the survey measure sets contain items that identify patients at risk for poor outcomes, and 4 are available in languages other than english. however, only 1 survey (consumer assessment of health plans) has undergone studies of cross-cultural validation. among the measure sets based on administrative data, 3 included infant mortality, a well-known measure of health disparity. there are several instruments designed to measure health care quality for children. despite this, we found relatively few measures for assessing patient safety and living with illness and none for end-of-life care. few measures are designed for specific age categories among children. although equity is an overarching concern in health care quality, the application of current measures to assess disparities has been limited. these areas need additional research and development for a more complete assessment of health care quality for children.

the aim of this study was to assess neuromotor function at school age in children who had cerebral infarction on neonatal magnetic resonance imaging (mri). twenty-two children with evidence of cerebral infarction on neonatal brain mri (18 with arterial infarction and 4 with border-zone lesions) were assessed at school age with a structured neurologic examination and the movement assessment battery for children, a battery of tests designed to assess motor function. of the 22 children, 6 (30%) had hemiplegia and a further 7 (30%) showed some neuromotor abnormality such as asymmetry on the neurologic examination (n = 4) or poor scores on the neuromotor test without any sign of asymmetry (n = 3). the remaining 9 children had a normal motor outcome. hemiplegia was found only in children who had concomitant involvement of hemisphere, internal capsule, and basal ganglia on brain mri. children with involvement of the internal capsule, associated either with basal ganglia or hemispheric lesions, did not show hemiplegia but still had motor difficulties. our results suggest that although hemiplegia occurs in a relatively small proportion of children with neonatal cerebral infarction, other signs of neuromotor impairment can be present, and these become more obvious at school age when a more specific assessment can be performed. these results also suggest that the involvement of the internal capsule on neonatal mri can predict the presence of these abnormalities.

the state children's health insurance program (schip) has been operating for >5 years. policy makers are interested in the characteristics of children who have enrolled and changes in the health care needs of enrolled children as programs mature. new york state's schip evolved from a similar statewide health insurance program that was developed in 1991 (child health plus [chplus]). understanding how current schip enrollees differ from early chplus enrollees together with how program features changed during the period may shed light on how best to serve the evolving schip population. to 1) describe changes in the characteristics of children enrolled in 1994 chplus and 2001 schip; 2) determine if changes in the near-poor, age-eligible population during the time period could account for the evolution of enrollment; and 3) describe changes in the program during the period that could be responsible for the enrollment changes. new york state, stratified into 4 regions: new york city, new york city environs, upstate urban counties, and upstate rural counties. retrospective telephone interviews of parents of 2 cohorts of chplus enrollees: 1) children who enrolled in chplus in 1993 to 1994 and 2) children who enrolled in new york's schip in 2000 to 2001. the current population survey (cps) 1992 to 1994 and 1999 to 2001 were used to identify secular trends that could explain differences in the chplus and schip enrollees. program characteristics: 1994 chplus and 2001 schip were similar in design, both limiting eligibility by age, family income, and insurance status. schip 2001 included 1) expansion of eligibility to adolescents 13 to 19 years old; 2) expansion of benefits to include hospitalizations, mental health, and dental benefits; 3) changes in premium contributions; 4) more participating insurance plans, limited to managed care; 5) expansions in marketing and outreach; and 6) a combined enrollment application for schip and several low-income programs including medicaid. cohort 1 included 2126 new chplus enrollees 0 to 13 years old who were enrolled for at least 9 months, stratified by geographic region. cohort 2 included 1100 new schip enrollees 0 to 13 years old who were enrolled for at least 9 months, stratified by geographic region, age, race, and ethnicity. results were weighted to be representative of statewide chplus or schip new enrollees who met the sampling criteria. samples of age- and income-eligible children from new york state were drawn from the cps and pooled and reweighted (1992-1994 and 1999-2001) to generate a comparison group of children targeted by chplus and schip. sociodemographic characteristics, race and ethnicity (white non-hispanic, black non-hispanic, and hispanic), prior health insurance, health care access, and first source of information about the program. weighted bivariate analyses (comparisons of means and rates) adjusted for the complex sampling design to compare measures between the 2 program cohorts and between the 2 cps samples. we tested for equivalence by using chi2 statistics. as the program evolved from chplus to schip, relatively more black and hispanic children enrolled (9% to 30% black from 1994 to 2001, and 16% to 48% hispanic), more new york city residents (46% to 69% from 1994 to 2001), more children with parents who had less than a high school education (10% to 25%), more children from lower income families (59% to 75% below 150% of the federal poverty level), and more children from families with parents not working (7% to 20%) enrolled. these socioeconomic and demographic changes were not reflected in the underlying age- and income-eligible population. a greater proportion of 2001 enrollees were uninsured for some time immediately before enrollment (57% to 76% had an uninsured gap), were insured by medicaid during the year before enrollment (23% to 48%), and lacked a usc (5% to 14%). although "word of mouth" was the most common means by which families heard about both programs, a greater proportion of 2001 enrollees learned about schip from marketing or outreach sources. as new york programs for the uninsured evolved, more children from minority groups, with lower family incomes and education, and having less baseline access to health care were enrolled. although changes in the underlying population were relatively small, progressively increased marketing and outreach, particularly in new york city, the introduction of a single application form for schip and medicaid, and expansions in the benefit package may have accounted, in part, for the large change in the characteristics of enrollees.

the treatment of phenylketonuria (pku) in children and adults has been difficult because of erosion of dietary adherence, leading to poor school performance, impairment of executive functioning, loss of iq, and deterioration of white matter in the brain. mutant pku mice produced by exposure to n-ethyl-n'-nitrosourea (enu) were used to examine the effect of large neutral amino acid (lnaa) supplementation on brain and blood phenylalanine (phe). mice with pku, genotype enu 2/2 with features of classical pku, were supplemented with lnaa while on a normal diet. two dosages of lnaa were given 0.5 g/kg and 1.0 g/kg by gavage. blood phe was determined in the experimental, control, and sham-treated mice. brain phe was determined by magnetic resonance spectroscopy after perchloric acid extraction. branched-chain amino acid transferase (bcat) was determined in brain as a marker for energy metabolism. blood phe was reduced in the lnaa-treated mice by an average of 15% (0.5 g/kg) and 50% (1.0 g/kg) in 48 hours. there was a sustained decrease in the blood phe levels over a 6-week trial. the untreated mice and sham-treated mice maintained high blood phe throughout the experiments. brain phe level determined by magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed a decline of 46% after the lnaa treatment. bcat levels were lower (33%) in the enu 2/2 mice compared with wild-type. the bcat normalized in mice with pku that were treated with lnaa. the results suggest that giving lnaa lowered brain and blood phe levels in mice with pku. energy metabolism generated from bcat also improved in mice with pku after treatment with lnaa. data from the mice suggest that lnaa should be considered among the strategies to treat pku in humans.

the maternal phenylketonuria (pku) syndrome is caused by high blood phenylalanine (phe) levels during pregnancy, leading to a host of birth defects, especially microcephaly and congenital heart disease (chd). for finding whether the maternal pku syndrome could be prevented, an international collaborative study was organized to evaluate treatment with a phe-restricted diet. blood phe levels, maternal weight gain, and nutrient intakes during pregnancy were evaluated as to their effect on the rate of microcephaly and chd in the offspring. the study was a prospective, longitudinal effort aimed at lowering blood phe during pregnancy. women were enrolled at time of referral for pregnancy. nutrient intake analysis, which serves as the basis for this report, was available from 251 pregnancies. subjects were stratified by blood phe control of < or =600 micromol/l by 8 weeks gestation or >600 micromol/l by 8 weeks gestation. outcome of these pregnancies was correlated to blood phe levels, weight gain, and nutrient intake. the study goal was to attain blood phe levels of 120 to 360 micromol/l 3 months preconception; however, this goal was achieved by only a limited number of patients. therefore, the data presented were based on blood phe control < or =600 micromol/l or >600 micromol/l by 8 weeks of gestation. blood phe control of < or =600 micromol/l by 8 weeks of gestation was attained by 86 (34.3%) of the 251 women in this study, whereas the other 165 women had blood phe control >600 micromol/l by 8 weeks of gestation. of the 251 offspring, 166 were born with normal head circumference and 85 were born with microcephaly (<2 standard deviations below normal). women with blood phe >600 micromol/l at 8 weeks of gestation included 78 (92%) of the 85 infants with microcephaly compared with 8% in the group of women who had blood phe levels < or =600 micromol/l. weight gain during pregnancy was related to the rate of microcephaly. the highest occurrence of microcephaly (58%) was found in the pregnant women who gained <70% of recommended weight gain. stepwise logistic regression analysis was used to determine factors associated with microcephaly. significant factors included higher blood phe levels when off diet, higher average phe exposure during the pregnancy, low prepregnancy weight, poor weight gain during the pregnancy, and lower intake of protein and higher iron intake during the pregnancy. infants with chd were found only in the group of women who had blood phe levels >600 micromol/l by 8 weeks of gestation. there was a higher rate of chd in the offspring who were born to women who consumed <50% of the recommended intake of protein in the first trimester. the main source of protein for women with pku is the medical food; therefore, when protein intake was low, vitamin and mineral intakes were also inadequate. the data indicate that blood phe control and how soon it is attained during pregnancy with pku is important. normal pregnancy weight gain should be encouraged to reduce microcephaly. adequate protein and vitamin intakes early in pregnancy may have a protective effect for the prevention of chd, even if blood phe is elevated. the rate of microcephaly and chd may be reduced if nutrient intake is optimal while attempting to control blood phe levels.

to understand early educational and behavioral predicament in childhood "epilepsy only." a multicenter, prospective, longitudinal study was conducted of 51 outpatient schoolchildren with newly diagnosed idiopathic or cryptogenic epilepsy and 48 sex-matched classmate control subjects. all children underwent neuropsychological assessment 3 times within the first year after diagnosis; parents and teachers completed behavior questionnaires, and patients' parents were interviewed to inventory contextual adversity. principal components analysis of cognition and behavior disclosed 6 major components that were related with the interview data (repeated measures analysis of variance). despite similar intelligence and educational background, significantly more patients (51%) than control subjects (27%) required special educational assistance. patients obtained worse scores across components of cognition and behavior. parents and teachers perceived patients to have more behavioral problems. differences between groups existed at pretreatment baseline. over time, notwithstanding stable percentages of poor scores in both groups, nonpersistence of poor scores was impressive (each time other children scored poorly in other domains). rather than epilepsy characteristics, contextual adversities were significant risk factors. already in the earliest stage of the illness, children with epilepsy are liable to vicissitudes in cognitive and behavioral functioning. contextual variables are all-important.

to correlate 3 common presenting signs of retinoblastoma with patient and ocular survival and to assess the efficacy of current pediatric screening practices for retinoblastoma. a retrospective study was conducted of 1831 retinoblastoma patients from our center (1914-june 2000). patient survival (excluding deaths from other primary neoplasms) and ocular survival (presenting eyes) rates were calculated and analyzed using the kaplan-meier method. leukocoria correlated with excellent patient survival (>86%, 5 years) but poor ocular survival in unilateral (4%, 5 years) and bilateral patients (29%, 5 years). a total of 308 (19%) of 1654 patients presented with strabismus: patient survival was excellent (90%, 5 years), and ocular survival was poor (17%, 5 years) yet better than leukocoria. patients who had a family history of retinoblastoma and were clinically screened for retinal tumors from birth were diagnosed younger (8 months of age) and earlier (reese ellsworth group 1 = 26 [58%] of 45) and had better ocular survival than nonscreened patients with a family history. more patients were initially detected by family/friends (1315 [80%] of 1632) than pediatricians (123 [8%] of 1632) or ophthalmologists (156 [10%] of 1632). most us children whose retinoblastoma is diagnosed initially present with leukocoria detected by a parent, despite routine pediatric screening for leukocoria via the red reflex test. initial disease detection at the point of leukocoria or strabismus correlated with high patient survival rates and poor ocular survival rates for the presenting eye. saving eyes and vision requires disease recognition before leukocoria, as demonstrated by the better ocular salvage rate among patients who had a positive family history and received clinical surveillance via early, routine dilated funduscopic examinations by an ophthalmologist.

bullying and being bullied have been recognized as health problems for children because of their association with adjustment problems, including poor mental health and more extreme violent behavior. it is therefore important to understand how bullying and being bullied affect the well-being and adaptive functioning of youth. we sought to use multiple data sources to better understand the psychological and social problems exhibited by bullies, victims, and bully-victims. analysis of data from a community sample of 1985 mostly latino and black 6th graders from 11 schools in predominantly low socioeconomic status urban communities (with a 79% response rate). peer reports of who bullies and who is victimized, self-reports of psychological distress, and peer and teacher reports of a range of adjustment problems. twenty-two percent of the sample was classified as involved in bullying as perpetrators (7%), victims (9%), or both (6%). compared with other students, these groups displayed school problems and difficulties getting along with classmates. despite increased conduct problems, bullies were psychologically strongest and enjoyed high social standing among their classmates. in contrast, victims were emotionally distressed and socially marginalized among their classmates. bully-victims were the most troubled group, displaying the highest level of conduct, school, and peer relationship problems. to be able to intervene with bullying, it is important to recognize the unique problems of bullies, victims, and bully-victims. in addition to addressing these issues directly with their patients, pediatricians can recommend school-wide antibullying approaches that aim to change peer dynamics that support and maintain bullying.

streptococcus pneumoniae infections in the neonate (spin) are relatively unusual events (1%-11% of neonatal sepsis) but are associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. previous reports suggest that invasive spin is associated with prolonged rupture of membranes, maternal colonization/illness, prematurity, early-onset pneumonia presentation (<72 hours), and high mortality (50%). the aim of this study was to review the current epidemiology and clinical course of spin. the us pediatric multicenter pneumococcal surveillance group has been prospectively monitoring s pneumoniae infections since 1993 in 8 children's hospitals. for this report, data were gathered retrospectively from the charts of neonates who were 30 days of age and younger and had spin from september 1993 to february 2001. all pneumococcal isolates were sent to a central laboratory for serogrouping/typing and susceptibility testing. twenty-nine cases of spin were identified from a total of 4428 episodes of s pneumoniae infection in children. sixty-six percent were male, and 55% were white; the mean age was 18.1 day (+/-8.2). ninety percent of infants were >or=38 weeks' gestation. two mothers had bacterial infections at delivery; 1 had s pneumoniae isolated from both blood and cervix, and 1 had clinical amnionitis. the primary diagnoses in the neonates were bacteremia (8), meningitis (8), bacteremic pneumonia (4), septic arthritis/osteomyelitis (1), and otitis media (8). thirty percent of infants with invasive spin presented with leukopenia/neutropenia, but this did not predict poor outcome. the infecting pneumococcal serogroups were 19 (32%); 9 (18%); 3 and 18 (11% each); 1, 6, and 14 (7% each); and 5 and 12 (3.5% each). twenty-six percent of invasive neonatal infections were caused by serogroups 1, 3, 5, and 12, which are not contained in the heptavalent pneumococcal vaccine. in contrast, 6% of invasive nonneonatal disease was caused by these same nonvaccine serogroups. susceptibility testing demonstrated that 21.4% of isolates were penicillin nonsusceptible and 3.6% were ceftriaxone nonsusceptible. three (14.3%) neonates with invasive spin died; all deaths occurred within 36 hours of presentation. deaths did not appear to be related to pneumococcal serogroup or susceptibilities. compared with previous studies of neonates with pneumococcal infection, this series showed that infants with spin were usually 2 to 3 weeks of age at presentation; likely to be full term; and ill with pneumonia, meningitis, and otitis media. this late-onset presentation was associated with an overall mortality rate of 10.3% (14.3% for invasive disease).

avoidable hospitalization conditions (ahcs) are hospitalizations that potentially can be avoided with timely, appropriate outpatient care. the specific reasons for avoidability, and parents and physicians' perspectives on the proportion of actually avoidable pediatric ahcs, have not been examined adequately. to identify how pediatric hospitalizations might be avoided, and to determine the proportion of avoidable ahcs according to parents and physicians of hospitalized children. cross-sectional survey of parents, primary care physicians (pcps), and inpatient attending physicians (iaps) of a consecutive series of children who were admitted with ahcs to an urban hospital in a 14-month period. the 554 hospitalized children had a median age of 4 years; most were poor (median annual family income: 12,000 dollars), nonwhite (91%), and had public (73%) or no (16%) health insurance. the most frequent ahc diagnoses were asthma (43%), dehydration/gastroenteritis (16%), pneumonia (11%), seizure disorder (8%), and skin infections (8%). only 25% of parents said that their child's admission was avoidable, compared with 29% of pcps and 32% of iaps. the proportion of ahc hospitalizations assessed as avoidable varied according to the source or combination of sources, from 13% for agreement among all 3 sources to 46% as identified by any 1 of the 3 sources. pcps (71%) and iaps (48%) significantly more often than parents (35%) cited parent/patient-related reasons for how hospitalizations could have been avoided, including adhering to and refilling medications, better outpatient follow-up, and avoiding known disease triggers. parents (48%) significantly more often than pcps (18%) and iaps (37%) cited physician-related reasons for how hospitalizations could have been avoided, including better education by physicians about the child's condition, and better quality of care. multivariate analyses revealed that an age >or=11 years, an asthma diagnosis, working poor family income, and having no health insurance were associated with approximately double to triple the odds of an avoidable hospitalization. the proportion of ahcs assessed as avoidable varies from 13% to 46%, depending on the source. adolescents, children with asthma, children from working-poor families, and uninsured children are at greatest risk for avoidable hospitalizations. many pediatric hospitalizations might be avoided if parents and children were better educated about the child's condition, medications, the need for follow-up care, and the importance of avoiding known disease triggers. direct assessment by parents and physicians of hospitalized children can be an informative way to examine the proportion of avoidable pediatric hospitalizations and how they can be prevented.

despite many recent advances in vaccine delivery, the goal for universal immunization set in 1977 has not been reached. in 2001, only 77.2% of us toddlers 19 to 35 months of age had received their basic immunization series of 4 doses of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (dtap) vaccine, 3 doses of inactivated poliovirus vaccine, 1 dose of measles-mumps-rubella (mmr) vaccine, and 3 doses of haemophilus influenzae type b (hib) vaccine. children who are members of a racial or ethnic minority, who are poor, or who live in inner-city or rural areas have lower immunization rates than do children in the general population. additional challenges to vaccine delivery include the introduction of new childhood vaccines, ensuring a dependable supply of vaccines, bolstering public confidence in vaccine safety, and sufficient compensation for vaccine administration. recent research has demonstrated specific and practical changes physicians can make to improve their practices' effectiveness in immunizing children, including the following: 1) sending parent reminders for upcoming visits and recall notices; 2) using prompts during all office visits to remind parents and staff about immunizations needed at that visit; 3) repeatedly measuring practice-wide immunization rates over time as part of a quality improvement effort; and 4) having in place standing orders for registered nurses, physician assistants, and medical assistants to identify opportunities to administer vaccines. pediatricians should work individually and collectively at local and national levels to ensure that all children receive all childhood immunizations on time. pediatricians also can proactively communicate with parents to ensure they understand the overall safety and efficacy of vaccines.

both acute and chronic complications of diabetes account for a disproportionate percentage of us health care expenditures. despite improvements in diabetes care, the incidence of adverse events in children with type 1 diabetes remains high, particularly for youths with poor glycemic control. cost-effective intervention programs designed to reduce complications are needed. this study evaluated a low-intensity, nonmedical intervention using a case manager (called a "care ambassador"), with and without the supplementation of psychoeducational modules, designed to monitor and encourage routine diabetes care visits to reduce short-term adverse outcomes and improve glycemic control in youths with type 1 diabetes. we performed a 2-year prospective, randomized clinical trial in 299 youths with type 1 diabetes, aged 7 to 16 years, comparing 3 treatment programs (care ambassador [ca], care ambassador plus psychoeducational modules [ca+], and standard multidisciplinary diabetes care [sc]). the study was conducted in a large metropolitan us city from april 1997 through april 2000. number of medical visits, frequency of hypoglycemic events, hospital/emergency department (ed) utilization, and glycosylated hemoglobin a1c were assessed during follow-up. during the 2-year study period, both the ca and ca+ groups had significantly more routine visits (mean [standard deviation]: 7.3 [2.06] and 7.5 [2.02], respectively) compared with the sc group (5.4 [2.62]). the ca+ intervention group had significantly reduced rates of short-term adverse outcomes compared with the other 2 groups; 25% fewer total hypoglycemic events, 60% fewer severe hypoglycemic events, and 40% fewer hospitalizations and ed visits. "high-risk" youths in the ca+ group (baseline glycosylated hemoglobin a1c > or =8.7%) were 3.4-fold (1.57-7.41) more likely to improve their glycemic control compared with those at high risk in the other 2 groups. for youths with type 1 diabetes, the ca and ca+ interventions increased visit frequency. youths in the ca+ intervention had reduced rates of hypoglycemia and hospital/ed utilization with estimated annual cost savings of 80 000 dollars to 90 000 dollars. the ca+ intervention compared with the other 2 groups improved glycemic control in "high-risk" youths. nonmedical case management incorporating psychoeducational modules seems to be a cost-effective approach to improving outcomes in youths with diabetes.

studies of long-term outcome on nonaccidental head injury (nahi) in young children have shown severe neurodevelopmental sequelae in most cases. for improving the knowledge of outcome and for identifying prognostic factors, additional clinical and cerebral imaging data are needed. the aim of this study was to describe clinical and imaging features over time and to consider their value for predicting neurodevelopmental outcome. a retrospective medical record review was conducted of 23 children with confirmed nahi, for whom an extended follow-up of 2.5 to 13 years (mean: 6 years) was contemplated. glasgow coma scale scores, severity of retinal hemorrhages, presence of skull fractures, cranial growth deceleration, and sequential neuroimaging data (computed tomography and/or magnetic resonance imaging) were compared with patterns of clinical evolution assessed by the glasgow outcome scale. clinical outcome showed that 14 (61%) children had severe disabilities, 8 (35%) had moderate disabilities, and 1 (4%) was normal. a low initial glasgow coma scale score, severe retinal hemorrhages, presence of skull fracture, and cranial growth deceleration were significantly associated with poor developmental outcome. eighteen of the 23 patients had abnormal magnetic resonance imaging scans. this examination disclosed atrophy when performed beyond 15 days of injury. atrophy seemingly resulted from various brain lesions, namely, contusions, infarcts, and other lesions within the white matter. presence of intraparenchymal brain lesions within the first 3 months was significantly associated with neurodevelopmental impairment. severity of motor and cognitive dysfunctions was related to the extent of intraparenchymal lesions. early clinical and radiologic findings in nahi are of prognostic value for neurodevelopmental outcome.

to determine whether physicians can estimate accurately the age of an accidental bruise on direct physical examination. children who presented to the emergency department of a children's hospital with accidental bruises of known age and origin had demographic data and information about their injury recorded. history-blinded emergency pediatricians, other physicians, and trainees (fellows, residents, and medical students) independently examined the bruised area and recorded injury characteristics and age estimation and ranked characteristics that influenced their estimation. fifty children with accidental bruises were enrolled. emergency pediatricians' accuracy of age estimation within 24 hours of actual age was 47.6%. individual emergency pediatrician's accuracy ranged from 0% to 100%, and the interobserver reliability was poor (kappa = -0.03). accuracy within 24 hours of actual age was 29.4% for other physicians and 36.8% for trainees, which was similar to the emergency pediatricians. observers reported using color primarily to estimate age, followed by tenderness and then swelling; however, none of these factors was significantly correlated with accuracy. physician estimates of bruise age are highly inaccurate within 24 hours of the actual age of the injury. large individual variability and poor interrater reliability also suggest that caution must be used when interpreting these estimates. this study supports earlier studies, urging extreme caution in estimating bruise age, even when such estimates are based on direct examination of the injured area.

to assess the association between peak total serum bilirubin (psb) levels during the first 2 weeks of life and neurodevelopmental outcomes of extremely low birth weight (elbw) infants at 18 to 22 months' postmenstrual age. a retrospective analysis was conducted of a cohort of elbw infants (401-1000 g) who survived to 14 days of age in the 12 participating centers of the national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network between january 1, 1994, and december 31, 1997. demographic and clinical risk factors and psb levels during the first 14 days were analyzed with reference to death or adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18 to 22 months' postmenstrual age. the neurodevelopmental variables considered were psychomotor developmental index (pdi) <70, mental developmental index (mdi) <70, moderate or severe cerebral palsy (cp), hearing impairment (needs hearing aids), and a composite category designated as neurodevelopmental impairment (ndi). the ndi is defined as infants with any 1 or more of the following: pdi <70, mdi <70, moderate to severe cp, bilateral blindness, or bilateral hearing impairment requiring amplification. the subjects of this cohort analysis are infants who were admitted to the network centers during calendar years 1994-1997 and survived beyond 14 days and had psb recorded during the 14-day period. from this cohort, 3246 infants survived at discharge, 79 died after discharge, and 592 were lost to follow-up. thus, 2575 of 3167 infants were seen in the follow-up clinics with a compliance rate of 81%. logistic regression analysis showed that various demographic and clinical variables are associated with poor neurodevelopmental outcomes. after adjustment for these risk factor, significant association were found between psb (mg/dl) and death or ndi (odds ratio: 1.068; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.03-1.11); pdi <70 (r = 1.057; 95% ci: 1.00-1.12), and hearing impairment requiring hearing aids (odds ratio: 1138; 95% ci: 1.00-1.30). there was no significant association between psb (mg/dl) and cp, mdi <70, and ndi. psb concentrations during the first 2 weeks of life are directly correlated with death or ndi, hearing impairment, and pdi <70 in elbw infants. the statistical association based on retrospective analysis of observational data and relatively small effect size should be interpreted with caution. furthermore, because of the possibility of compounding effects of variables on outcome, the potential benefits of moderate hyperbilirubinemia and the potential adverse effects of phototherapy, a randomized, controlled trial of aggressive and conservative phototherapy is needed to address this controversial issue.

an appreciation of the role of social and emotional well-being in determining health outcomes is important in advancing the equity agenda.(1) these aspects of health are adversely affected by inequity. they also are important as potential causal factors. low levels of emotional and social well-being among the rich may be important in perpetuating health and social inequity. in the past, most research on inequity has focused on the negative end of the continuum of emotional and social health (eg, child abuse, conduct disorder, mental illness, drug and alcohol abuse) and concentrated on the problems of the poor, not the rich. the prevalence of emotional and social well-being has not been well studied. at the other end of the spectrum, emotional and behavioral problems now are the most important cause of disability in childhood,(2) affecting between 10% and 20% of children.(3) in between these 2 extremes, some children are socially competent, are liked by their peers, are resilient in the face of problems, know their own minds, are kind to others, and are able to handle conflict in a way that leads to resolution. others are prone to aggression and deceit, are ostracized by their peer group, and create conflict and distress. these children may have very low self-esteem. they often are manifestly unhappy and anxious and certainly make others unhappy and anxious. this group may not meet the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders-defined criteria for emotional and behavioral problems; teachers therefore may be more aware of them and their impact on others than physicians. as a result, teachers and educational psychologists have been at the forefront of developing interventions to help this group.

a major independent inquiry into inequalities in health-and policies that would reduce them-was published in december 1998.(1) it identified >40 recommendations designed to reduce inequalities in health. lifting children out of poverty is among the most important strategies to improve child health. if we want to change policies on health and poverty, then we have to consider the broad political context within which our health systems work. in the united kingdom, we have a welfare state that sends checks and cash income to 85% of households every month. many people pay into the welfare state, many people get money back, and everybody receives services.(2) in the united states, the situation is different. there, many people pay into the state, but only the poor and corporations actually receive a check. i leave you to decide who gets the most out of these respective systems. we also have fundamental differences in our health systems. in the united kingdom, 97% of expenditures on health are made by the state; there is virtually no private spending. in the united states, only 44% of health expenditures are made by the state. the limited amount of private health expenditures in the united kingdom will be reduced further as the national health service provides more dentistry in the future. in terms of the amount of resources, the united states spends 14% of its gross domestic product on health, compared with 6% in the united kingdom. the united states spent 3700 dollars per person on health care in 1997. in the united kingdom, we spent less than one third of that.

to determine the frequency, types, sources, and predictors of conflict surrounding the care of pediatric intensive care unit (picu) patients with prolonged stay. a tertiary care, university-affiliated picu in boston. all patients admitted over an 11-month period whose stay exceeded 8 days (the 85th percentile length of stay for the picu under study), and intensive care physicians and nurses who were responsible for their care. we prospectively identified conflicts by interviewing the treating physicians and nurses at 2 stages during the patients' picu stay. all conflicts detected were classified by type (team-family, intrateam, or intrafamily) and source. using a case-control design, we then identified predictors of conflict through bivariate and multivariate analyses. we enrolled 110 patients based on the length-of-stay criterion. clinicians identified 55 conflicts involving 51 patients in this group. hence, nearly one half of all patients followed had a conflict associated with their care. thirty-three of the conflicts (60%) were team-family, 21 (38%) were intrateam, and the remaining 1 was intrafamily. the most commonly cited sources of team-family conflict were poor communication (48%), unavailability of parents (39%), and disagreements over the care plan (39%). medicaid insurance status was independently associated with the occurrence of conflict generally (odds ratio = 4.97) and team-family conflict specifically (odds ratio = 7.83). efforts to reduce and manage conflicts that arise in the care of critically ill children should be sensitive to the distinctive features of these conflicts. knowledge of risk factors for conflict may also help to target such interventions at the patients and families who need them most.

the prevalence of repeated otitis media (om) increased during the 1980s, but it is unknown if the increase has continued. to determine trends in the prevalence of om, early-onset om, and repeated om among us children from 1988 to 1994 and to identify factors that may explain any observed changes. the third national health and nutrition examination survey was administered in 2 phases: phase i (1988-1991) and phase ii (1991-1994), each comprising a national probability sample. om (ever having had om), early-onset om (first episode at <12 months of age), and repeated om (>or=3 episodes) were assessed for 8261 children <6 years of age. after controlling for risk factors for om, the prevalence of om from phase i to phase ii increased from 66.7% to 69.7% (odds ratio [or] = 1.1; 95% confidence interval [ci] =.99, 1.1), early-onset om increased from 41.1% to 45.8% (or = 1.1; 95% ci = 1.03, 1.2), and repeated om increased from 34.8% to 41.1% (or = 1.2; 95% ci = 1.1, 1.4). this observed increase corresponds to 561,000 and 720,000 more children having early-onset om and repeated om, respectively. child care use, early breastfeeding termination, asthma, and access to health care did not significantly increase from phase i to phase ii. the prevalence of early-onset om and repeated om was higher for affluent children, but the greatest increase in prevalence was among impoverished children. there was an increase in allergic conditions from phase i to phase ii for poor children (22.6% to 30.2%). the prevalence of early-onset om and repeated om continued to increase among preschool children in the united states. further research to investigate this increasing prevalence should explore changes in management practice and an increase in prevalence of allergic conditions among poor children.

rickets, a disease of vitamin d deficiency, is rarely confronted by the practicing pediatrician in the united states today. at the turn of the 20th century, rickets was rampant among the poor children living in the industrialized and polluted northern cities of the united states. with the discovery of vitamin d and the delineation of the anti-rachitic properties of cod-liver oil by the 1930s, it became possible to not only treat but also eradicate rickets in the united states. rickets was a common disease in 17th century england. frances glisson's treatise on rickets published in 1650, a glorious contribution to english medicine, described the clinical and anatomic features of rickets in great detail. the exact etiology of rickets had been elusive until the 1920s. during the glissonian era, rickets was a mysterious disease. by the late 19th and early 20th century, faulty diet or faulty environment (poor hygiene, lack of fresh air and sunshine) or lack of exercise was implicated in its etiology. animal experiments, appreciation of folklore advocating the benefits of cod-liver oil, and the geographical association of rickets to lack of sunshine were all relevant factors in the advancement of knowledge in the conquest of this malady. in this article, the history of rickets pertaining to the discovery of vitamin d, cod-liver oil, and sunlight is reviewed.

capitation rates for the state children's health insurance program (schip) funded under title xxi of the social security act were based on assumptions about the health care needs of children enrolled in this program. it has been suggested that parents are selective in enrolling children who are, in their opinion, most likely to need care, and that families who do not view their children as needing such care are more likely to ignore opportunities to seek or to maintain enrollment in schip insurance. thus, there have been concerns that enrollees might have more health conditions than a general population of children. the purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that children in title xxi have more ongoing health conditions than expected by comparing health status data from enrollees in 1 state schip program to a nationally representative sample of children in the united states. this study used statewide data obtained in a survey of florida schip program enrollees and national data obtained on a subset of the children who were assessed in the 1994 national health interview survey (nhis). we examined health and demographic data collected by means of a structured telephone survey from parents for a random sample of 2432 children 2 to 18 years old who participated in the florida healthy kids program during the time period of october 1, 1997 through september 30, 1998. we compared these data to information on a national sample of all 26 845 children in the same age range whose health was assessed by the 1994 nhis, and to a subset of the 6460 children in the nhis sample whose family income met the eligibility criteria for schip. to do this, we eliminated those children who were receiving medicaid and those children whose household income levels were known to be above the eligibility level for schip. we also excluded children whose household income was not reported. thus, effectively this subsample contained non-medicaid children, whose family incomes were below 185% of the federal poverty level. in florida, a parent interview conducted by telephone included the questionnaire for identifying children with chronic conditions (quiccc), and their responses were used to determine if the child had any chronic health conditions. the quiccc is a validated questionnaire containing 39-item sequences that ask about consequences of health conditions in children. it not only provides an overall classification of whether the child has a chronic condition, but also yields information about the consequences affecting the child within 3 condition-related domains: 1) functional limitations; 2) dependency on compensatory mechanisms or assistance; and 3) service need or use above and beyond routine care for age. the 1994 nhis core interview and disability supplement contained a series of questions about children's functioning and service use that simulated the quiccc, and we applied a previously published algorithm for determining the presence of a chronic condition using these items. both data sets included comparable information on parental ratings of children's health status (excellent, very good, good, fair, poor), and on school absences, bed days, and restricted activity days in the previous 2 weeks. children in the florida schip program were more than twice as likely to have chronic health conditions than similarly aged children in the general population or children in the income restricted national subsample (31% vs 15.9% and 14.6%, respectively) and there also were more schip children with school absences (29% vs 18% and 16.7%, respectively). in contrast, the rating of overall health of schip children was not poorer according to their parents, and they did not have more activity restrictions. children in florida schip who had conditions were more likely to experience related consequences within each of 3 domains, and they were nearly 3 times as likely to have all 3 types of consequences (7% in florida schip sample vs 2.8% and 1.7% in the full national sample and in the income-matched subsamome-matched subsample). however, the florida schip enrollees differed from the age and income-matched national sample in terms of the proportion of hispanics. thus, to verify these findings, we weighted the schip sample to match the racial and ethnic proportions found in the national sample and repeated the analyses. the findings were robust, and there was no change in the percentage of children with special health care needs after such weighting. overall, the results of these analyses support the notion of adverse selection and retention in the schip program. this is unlikely to be the result of aggressive marketing in enrollment sites that serve children with more medical problems, as florida health care providers rank third as a source of information about the title xxi program after family and friends and the schools. in addition, florida has active outreach and single-page application process for medicaid and an aggressive program to move children to title v, which also should minimize the numbers of children with special health care needs enrolled in schip. nevertheless, these findings suggest that the children being enrolled in florida's schip program are not the largely healthy population that was envisioned. if replicated in other schip programs, these findings raise questions about the basic underlying assumptions concerning the health of potential enrollees and could have implications for the long-term fiscal viability of the program.

there is little information about the long-term outcomes of children with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease, a group putatively at high risk for poor neurologic outcomes. the purpose of this study is to assess the long-term neuropsychologic and health outcomes of children with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease. we conducted a matched cross-sectional study of children with facial nerve palsy in connecticut who met the centers for disease control and prevention national surveillance case definition for lyme disease. we identified children with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease from population-based data for the state of connecticut from 1984 to 1991 as well as from selected clinical practices from 1984 to 1998. for each case, 2 controls without lyme disease, matched by age, were selected by sequential digit dialing technique. both patients and controls (or their parents) were interviewed using structured questionnaires. outcomes included self/parents' reports both of symptoms and of abilities to perform normal daily activities since the diagnosis was made (or for an equivalent period of time for controls). in addition, the patients with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease were evaluated with a battery of neuropsychologic tests. of the 43 patients, 30% were female and 93% were white. median age at diagnosis was 8 years (range: 2-18 years). mean time to follow-up was 49 months (range: 7-161 months). of the patients, 16% had been treated parenterally with ceftriaxone and 84% had been treated orally with either doxycycline or amoxicillin. overall, 79% believed they were cured of lyme disease, 9% believed they were not cured, and 12% did not know. the proportions of patients and of matched controls that reported increased problems with normal daily activities (eg, exercise, academic performance, word recall, sleeping) were similar. patients with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease were more likely than matched controls to report symptoms of neck pain, changes in behavior, pains in joints or muscles, numbness or funny sensations in nerves, and problems with memory, but three quarters of them did not attribute these problems to lyme disease. twenty patients agreed to undergo neuropsychologic testing; all had average to above average scores on tests of iq (eg, mean iq was 110.2), memory, learning, attention, concentration, math, reading and spelling performance, executive functioning, abstract thinking, sequential processing, visuospatial scanning, and motor speed. there were no apparent differences in outcomes between children who received oral versus parenteral treatment. the neuropsychologic and health outcomes of children with facial nerve palsy attributable to lyme disease 7 to 161 months earlier are comparable to those who did not have lyme disease.

why a task force on the family? the practice of pediatrics is unique among medical specialties in many ways, among which is the nearly certain presence of a parent when health care services are provided for the patient. regardless of whether parents or other family members are physically present, their influence is pervasive. families are the most central and enduring influence in children's lives. parents are also central in pediatric care. the health and well-being of children are inextricably linked to their parents' physical, emotional and social health, social circumstances, and child-rearing practices. the rising incidence of behavior problems among children attests to some families' inability to cope with the increasing stresses they are experiencing and their need for assistance. when a family's distress finds its voice in a child's symptoms, pediatricians are often parents' first source for help. there is enormous diversity among families-diversity in the composition of families, in their ethnic and racial heritage, in their religious and spiritual orientation, in how they communicate, in the time they spend together, in their commitment to individual family members, in their connections to their community, in their experiences, and in their ability to adapt to stress. within families, individuals are different from one another as well. pediatricians are especially sensitive to differences among children-in their temperaments and personalities, in their innate and learned abilities, and in how they view themselves and respond to the world around them. it is remarkable and a testament to the effort of parents and to the resilience of children that most families function well and most children succeed in life. family life in the united states has been subjected to extensive scrutiny and frequent commentary, yet even when those activities have been informed by research, they tend to be influenced by personal experience within families and by individual and cultural beliefs about how society and family life ought to be. the process of formulating recommendations for pediatric practice, public policy, professional education, and research requires reaching consensus on some core values and principles about family life and family functioning as they affect children, knowing that some philosophic disagreements will remain unresolved. the growing multicultural character of the country will likely heighten awareness of our diversity. many characteristics of families have changed during the past 3 to 5 decades. families without children younger than 18 years have increased substantially, and they are now the majority. the average age at marriage has increased, and a greater proportion of births is occurring to women older than 30 years. between 1970 and 2000, the proportion of children in 2-parent families decreased from 85% to 69%, and more than one quarter (26%) of all children live with a single parent, usually their mother. most of this change reflects a dramatic increase in the rate of births to unmarried women that went from 5.3% in 1960 to 33.2% in 2000. another factor in this change is a slowly decreasing but still high divorce rate that is roughly double what it was in the mid-1950s. family income is strongly related to children's health, and the financial resources that families have available are closely tied to changes in family structure. family income in real dollars has trended up for many decades, but the benefits have not been shared equally. for example, the median income of families with married parents has increased by 146% since 1970, but female-headed households have experienced a growth of 131%. more striking is that in 2000, the median income of female-headed households was only 47% of that of married-couple families and only 65% of that of families with 2 married parents in which the wife was not employed. not surprising, the proportion of children who live in poverty is approximately 5 times greater for female-headed families than for married-couple families. the comped families than for married-couple families. the composition of children's families and the time parents have for their children affect child rearing. consequent to the increase in female-headed households, rising economic and personal need, and increased opportunities for women, the proportion of mothers who are in the workforce has climbed steadily over the past several decades. currently, approximately two thirds of all mothers with children younger than 18 years are employed. most families with young children depend on child care, and most child care is not of good quality. reliance on child care involves longer days for children and families, the stress imposed by schedules and created by transitions, exposure to infections, and considerable cost. an increasing number and proportion of parents are also devoting time previously available to their children to the care of their own parents. the so-called "sandwich generation" of parents is being pulled in multiple directions. the amount and use of family time also has changed with a lengthening workday, including the amount of commuting time necessary to travel between work and home, and with the intrusion of television and computers into family life. in public opinion polls, most parents report that they believe it is more difficult to be a parent now than it used to be; people seem to feel more isolated, social and media pressures on and enticements of their children seem greater, and the world seems to be a more dangerous place. social and public policy has not kept up with these changes, leaving families stretched for time and stressed to cope and meet their responsibilities. what can and what should pediatrics do to help families raise healthy and well-adjusted children? how can individual pediatricians better support families? family pediatrics: the american academy of pediatrics (aap) board of directors appointed the task force on the family to help guide the development of public policy and recommend how to assist pediatricians to promote well-functioning families (see appendix). the magnitude of the assigned work required task force members to learn a great deal from research and researchers in the fields of social and behavioral sciences. a review of some critical literature was completed by a consultant to the task force and accompanies this report. that review identified a convergence of pediatrics and research on families by other disciplines. the task force found that a great deal is known about family functioning and family circumstances that affect children. with this knowledge, it is possible to provide pediatric care in a way that promotes successful families and good outcomes for children. the task force refers to that type of care as "family-oriented care" or "family pediatrics" and strongly endorses policies and practices that promote the adoption of this 2-generational approach as a hallmark of pediatrics. during the past decade, family advocates have successfully promoted family-centered care, "the philosophies, principles and practices that put the family at the heart or center of services; the family as the driving force." most pediatricians report that they involve families in the decision making regarding the health care of their child and make an effort to understand the needs of the family as well as the child. family pediatrics, like family-centered care, requires an active, productive partnership between the pediatrician and the family. but family pediatrics extends the responsibilities of the pediatrician to include screening, assessment, and referral of parents for physical, emotional, or social problems or health risk behaviors that can adversely affect the health and emotional or social well-being of their child. family context of child health: the power and importance of families to children arises out of the extended duration for which children are dependent on adults to meet their basic needs. children's needs for which only a family can provide include social support, socialization, and coping and life skills. their self-esteem grows from being cared for, loved, and valued and feeling that they are part of a social unit that shares values, communicates openly, and provides companionship. families transmit and interpret values to their children and often serve as children's connection to the larger world, especially during the early years of life. although schools provide formal education, families teach children how to get along in the world. often, efforts to discuss families and make recommendations regarding practice or policy stumble over disagreements about the definition of a family. the task force recognized the diversity of families and chose not to operate from the position of a fixed definition. rather, the task force, which was to address pediatrics, decided to frame its deliberations and recommendations around the functions of families and how various aspects of the family context influence child rearing and child health. one model of family functioning that implicitly guided the task force is the family stress model (fig 1). stress of various sorts (eg, financial or health problems, lack of social support, unhappiness at work, unfortunate life events) can cause parents emotional distress and cause couples conflict and difficulty with their relationship. these responses to stress then disrupt parenting and the interactions between parent and child and can lead to short-term or lasting poor outcomes. the earlier these events transpire and the longer that the disruption lasts, the worse the outcomes for children. the task force favors efforts to encourage and support marriage yet recognizes that every family constellation can produce good outcomes for children and that none is certain to yield bad ones. (abstract truncated)

head injury is the leading cause of death in abused children under 2 years of age. evidence for establishing guidelines regarding screening for occult head injury in a neurologically asymptomatic child with other evidence of abuse is lacking. this is particularly important given that many children with acute inflicted head injury have evidence of old injury when they are diagnosed. the primary aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of occult head injury in a high-risk sample of abused children with normal neurologic examinations. the secondary aim was to describe characteristics of this population. children under 2 years of age admitted to an urban children's hospital between january 1998 and december 2001 with injuries suspicious for child abuse were eligible for this study if they had a normal neurologic examination on admission. subjects were selected if they met 1 of the following "high-risk" criteria: rib fractures, multiple fractures, facial injury, or age <6 months. subjects were excluded if they had a history of neurologic dysfunction, seizures, respiratory arrest, or if their initial physical examination revealed scalp injury. of the 65 patients who met these criteria, 51 (78.5%) had a head computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging in addition to skeletal survey. of these 51 patients, 19 (37.3%, 95% confidence interval 24.2-50.4%) had an occult head injury. injuries included scalp swelling (74%), skull fracture (74%), and intracranial injury (53%). all except 3 of the head-injured patients had at least a skull fracture or intracranial injury. skeletal survey alone missed 26% (5/19) of the cases. head-injured children were younger than non-head-injured children (median age 2.5 vs 5.1 months); all but 1 head-injured child was <1 year of age. among the head-injured children, 72% came from single parent households, 37% had mothers whose age was <21 years, and 26% had a history of prior child welfare involvement in their families. ophthalmologic examination was performed in 14 of the 19 cases; no retinal hemorrhages were noted. our results support a recommendation for universal screening in neurologically asymptomatic abused children with any of the high-risk criteria used in this study, particularly if that child is under 1 year of age. ophthalmologic examination is a poor screening method for occult head injury, and one should proceed directly to computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. given the high prevalence of occult head injury detected in this study, further study is warranted to estimate the prevalence of occult head injury in lower risk populations of abused children.

early learning programs have proven benefits for impoverished children; head start is the most widespread of such programs. the current involvement of pediatricians in the head start enrollment process is unknown. 1) to assess the knowledge, attitudes, and reported practices of pediatricians on referring families to head start; 2) to assess pediatricians' receptivity to a potential practice-based intervention to enhance their ability to make head start referrals. mail survey to stratified random sample of pediatricians practicing in poor and non-poor us zip codes. prevalence estimates and logistic regression models were estimated using weighted data. of 1000 surveys distributed, 472 of 772 presumed-eligible subjects completed surveys for a response rate of 61%. respondents and nonrespondents were similar with regard to age, gender, years in practice, and urban/rural practice setting. eighty percent of pediatricians reported discussing child care arrangements with a majority of their preschool-aged patients' families, while only 14% reported actually assisting these families in applying to head start. lack of time (77% of pediatricians) and nonphysician office staff (71%) were listed as the most significant barriers to helping families apply to head start. unfamiliarity with early childhood education (10%) was generally not seen as a barrier to this practice. head start knowledge (adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 1.43; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.01, 2.02), self-efficacy in advising families how to access local head start programs (aor: 3.49; 95% ci: 1.46, 8.38), and the belief that it is the pediatrician's responsibility to do so (aor: 9.98; 95% ci: 3.91, 25.48) were significantly associated with assisting families with head start enrollment. the majority of respondents (77%) reported a willingness to participate in a proposed computer-based intervention to aid eligible families in applying to head start. having access to a social worker (aor: 2.48; 95% ci: 1.17, 5.21) and respondent age (aor: 0.96 for each year; 95% ci: 0.93, 0.99) were significantly associated with likely participation in the intervention. although pediatricians report commonly discussing child care issues, few actively assist patients in the application process for head start. an intervention to facilitate head start referral from the physician's office must address time and staff limitations; education of pediatricians is a secondary need.

to evaluate the occurrence of autoimmune and inflammatory complications in wiskott-aldrich syndrome (was) and to determine risk factors and the prognosis of such complications with the aim of improving the definition of treatment options. we reviewed the records of 55 patients with was evaluated at necker-enfants malades hospital (paris) from 1980 to 2000. forty patients (72%) had at least 1 autoimmune or inflammatory complication. autoimmune hemolytic anemia was detected in 20 cases (36%); in all cases, onset occurred before the age of 5 years. other complications included neutropenia (25%), arthritis (29%), skin vasculitis (22%), cerebral vasculitis (7%), inflammatory bowel disease (9%), and renal disease (3%). the median survival of the entire population was 14.5 years. two autoimmune complications and 1 biological factor were predictive of a poor prognosis in this population: autoimmune hemolytic anemia, severe thrombocytopenia recurring after splenectomy, and high serum immunoglobulin m (igm) levels before splenectomy. autoimmune hemolytic anemia was significantly more observed in patients with high serum igm level. high serum igm concentration before splenectomy was identified as a risk factor for autoimmune hemolytic anemia; however, it must be confirmed. autoimmune hemolytic anemia and severe thrombocytopenia recurring after splenectomy were 2 indicators of a poor prognosis. those results suggest that patients with was and igm levels more than mean + 2 standard deviations before splenectomy should be placed under strict surveillance. furthermore, severe autoimmune complications should lead, as early as possible, to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation using the best available donor.

1). to describe the factors associated with not receiving an asthma diagnosis among children with frequent wheezing symptoms and 2). to determine risk factors for frequent wheezing in the population. the north carolina school asthma survey provided self-reported questionnaire data on respiratory health from 122 829 children ages 12 to 18 years enrolled in 499 public middle schools in north carolina during the 1999-2000 school year. questions from the international survey of allergies and asthma in childhood were used to estimate the prevalence of asthma and wheezing-related illness and associated factors. factors independently associated with undiagnosed frequent wheezing versus asymptomatic children included female gender (odds ratio [or]: 1.45; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.35-1.54), current smoking (or: 2.60; 95% ci: 2.43-2.79), exposure to household smoke (or: 1.59; 95% ci: 1.50-1.70), low socioeconomic status (or: 1.52; 95% ci: 1.42-1.63), and african american (or: 1.25; 95% ci: 1.15-1.34), native american (or: 1.35; 95% ci: 1.11-1.62), and mexican american (or: 1.32; 95% ci: 1.17-1.48) race/ethnicity. urban residence showed a weak negative association (or: 0.91; 95% ci: 0.85-0.96). a similar pattern of results was observed for analyses comparing odds of undiagnosed frequent wheeze versus diagnosed asthmatics. report of allergies was less likely in frequent wheezers (70%) compared with diagnosed asthmatics (86%), but much higher than in asymptomatic children (36%). thirty-three percent of children with undiagnosed frequent wheezing reported 1 or more physician visits in the last year for wheezing or breathing problems compared with 71% of children with diagnosed asthma, and 4% in asymptomatic children. the prevalence of any inhaler use in the past 12 months was 12% for undiagnosed frequent wheezers versus 78% for diagnosed asthmatics. the proportion of undiagnosed frequent wheezers with fair or poor self-rated health (23%) was slightly higher than diagnosed asthmatics (20%) and much higher than asymptomatic children (4%). in one of the largest adolescent asthma surveys ever reported in the united states, undiagnosed frequent wheezing was independently associated with female gender, current smoking, exposure to household smoke, low socioeconomic status, allergies, and african american, native american, and mexican american race/ethnicity. children with undiagnosed frequent wheezing were not receiving adequate health care for their asthma-like illness. clinicians who treat adolescents should consider asking adolescents specifically about wheezing. this information may assist primary care physicians in identifying children with undiagnosed asthma in need of treatment.

poor growth is a common problem in premature neonates and may be associated with neurodevelopmental delay. to evaluate the incidence of extrauterine growth restriction (growth values < or =10th percentile of intrauterine growth expectation based on estimated postmenstrual age in premature (23-34 weeks' estimated gestational age) neonates at the time they are discharged from the hospital. using a database formed from a computer-assisted tool that generates clinical progress notes and discharge summaries on neonatal intensive care unit admissions, we reviewed data on neonates discharged from 124 neonatal intensive care units between january 1, 1997, and december 31, 2000. we evaluated neonates who were born between 23 and 34 weeks' estimated gestational age without congenital anomalies and who were cared for at and discharged from the same hospital. for each patient, we compared the discharge growth values to the expected values based on our intrauterine growth data and postmenstrual age on the day of discharge. we defined extrauterine growth restriction as having a measured growth value (weight, length or head circumference) that was < or =10th percentile of the predicted value. in each specific birth weight and estimated gestational age group, we counted the number of neonates < or =10th percentile for each growth parameter and calculated the percentage of patients who had values < or =10th percentile at discharge. using logistic regression, we evaluated the factors associated with extrauterine growth restriction for weight, length, and head circumference. our sample included 24 371 premature neonates. data on discharge weight, length, and head circumference was available on 23 970, 17 203, and 20 885 neonates, respectively. the incidence of extrauterine growth restriction was common (28%, 34%, and 16% for weight, length, and head circumference, respectively). for each growth parameter, the incidence of extrauterine growth restriction increased with decreasing estimated gestational age and birth weight. factors independently associated with extrauterine growth restriction were male gender, need for assisted ventilation on day 1 of life, a history of necrotizing enterocolitis, need for respiratory support at 28 days of age, and exposure to steroids during the hospital course. extrauterine growth restriction remains a serious problem in premature neonates especially for neonates who are small, immature, and critically ill.

problems with organizational culture, lack of or poor team communications, and conflict are often seen as barriers to improvement efforts. a survey measuring aspects of organizational culture was administered twice to staff in neonatal intensive care units participating in the neonatal intensive care unit quality improvement collaborative year 2000 collaborative. the surveys provided comparative data on coordination, teamwork and leadership, conflict management, unit leadership and unit culture. these data were summarized and fed back to nicu teams with guidance on their use. interviews on the use of the survey were held with 12 medical directors and patient care leaders in 9 different nicus. the findings indicated that all the units contacted saw themselves as committed to undertaking the organizational survey and using the results. some units shared the data widely and initiated changes. other units limited the distribution of data to the unit leadership. there was no apparent relationship between scores on the survey and activities undertaken. several respondents credited the survey with helping to promote discussions about organizational and team issues. future use of the survey should include additional materials to assist in disseminating the results to staff.

to determine whether use of the glucowatch biographer improves glucose control in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. forty children in poor glucose control (glycohemoglobin [hba1c] >8%) were randomized to diabetes management with or without glucose monitoring using the biographer. conventional glucose monitoring was performed 4 times daily in both groups. those randomized to the biographer group were asked to wear the device 4 times per week for 3 months (intervention phase) and to perform blood glucose monitoring if the biographer alerted them that glucose was < or =70 mg/dl (3.9 mmol/l) or > or =300 mg/dl (16.7 mmol/l). after 3 months, all patients received biographers and were followed for 6 months (observation phase). hba1c values were determined at baseline and after 1, 3, 6, and 9 months. the median hba1c was 8.6% and 8.9% (control versus biographer) at baseline and was significantly lower in the biographer group after 3 months (8.4% vs 9%). more hypoglycemia was detected when subjects were wearing the biographer, especially at night. no severe hypoglycemia occurred. during the observation phase, hba1c values at 6 months were 8.5% and 8.3% and at 9 months were 8.6% and 8.4% in the control and biographer groups, respectively. two children dropped out of the study, 1 because of skin irritation from using the device. the glucowatch biographer was well tolerated by children and adolescents and significantly improved glucose control compared with standard therapy. the use of the biographer with an alarm to detect nocturnal hypoglycemia has the potential to increase the safety of diabetes management in children.

systemic carnitine deficiency may present with apnea, hypotonia, and poor growth. premature infants often manifest these symptoms and are at risk of developing carnitine deficiency because of immaturity of the biosynthetic pathway, lack of sufficient predelivery transplacental transport, and lack of sufficient exogenous supplementation. this study was undertaken to examine the effect of carnitine supplementation in premature infants. eighty preterm infants <1500 g were enrolled in a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of carnitine supplementation within 96 hours of delivery. growth, length of hospital stay, and frequency and severity of apnea were the primary outcome measures. weight gain and change in length, fronto-occipital head circumference, mid arm circumference, and triceps skinfold thickness were similar between the carnitine-supplemented and placebo groups. the amount and severity of apnea and the overall length of hospitalization were also similar between the 2 groups. the carnitine levels in the supplemented group were significantly higher than in the placebo group at 4 and 8 weeks after study entry. although preterm infants <1500 g have low carnitine levels, routine supplementation with carnitine has no demonstrable effect on growth, apnea, or length of hospitalization and thus seems to be unnecessary.

a 4-week-old boy with previous urinary tract infection and documented vesicoureteral reflux presented with urosepsis and septic arthritis of the right hip. compliance with prophylactic antibiotic therapy had been poor at home. complications such as bone and joint infection are known to occur after urinary tract infection in children with urologic abnormalities. however, previous similar reports describe discovery of the urinary tract anomalies only as part of an evaluation performed after the systemic complications have occurred. the purpose of this report is to stress the importance of defining urinary tract abnormalities in a case of antenatal hydronephrosis or at the time of the first urinary tract infection in infants so that appropriate investigations, management, and support of parental compliance can be undertaken to avoid systemic complications.

congenital or acquired hearing loss in infants and children has been linked with lifelong deficits in speech and language acquisition, poor academic performance, personal-social maladjustments, and emotional difficulties. identification of hearing loss through neonatal hearing screening as well as objective hearing screening of all infants and children can prevent or reduce many of these adverse consequences. this report outlines the risk indicators for hearing loss, provides guidance for when and how to assess hearing loss, and addresses hearing referral resources for children of all ages.

descriptive studies and clinical reports have suggested that human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)-positive children are at risk for behavioral problems. inadequate control groups and sample sizes have limited the ability of investigators to consider multiple influences that place hiv-positive children at risk for poor behavioral outcomes. we examined the unique and combined influences of hiv, prenatal drug exposure, and environmental factors on behavior in children who were perinatally exposed to hiv. participants included 307 children who were born to hiv-positive mothers (96 hiv infected and 211 seroreverters) and enrolled in a natural history, longitudinal study of women to infant hiv transmission. caregivers completed parent behavioral rating scales, beginning when the children were 3 years old. data were also collected on prenatal drug exposure; child age, gender, and ethnicity; caregiver relationship to child; and birth complications. multivariate analyses comparing the hiv-infected children with perinatally exposed but uninfected children from similar backgrounds failed to find an association between either hiv status or prenatal drug exposure and poor behavioral outcomes. the strongest correlates of increased behavioral symptoms were demographic characteristics. this study suggests that although a high prevalence of behavioral problems does exist among hiv-infected children, neither hiv infection nor prenatal drug exposure is the underlying cause. rather, other biological and environmental factors are likely contributors toward poor behavioral outcomes.

patient assessments of care are increasingly being considered an important dimension of quality of care. few studies have examined the types and extent of problems identified by parents in the care of hospitalized children and whether hospital characteristics are associated with some of these problems. the objective of this study was to describe the quality of pediatric inpatient care as perceived by parents of hospitalized children and test whether hospital characteristics (academic status, market competition, freestanding children's hospital) are associated with variations in quality. we performed a cross-sectional analysis of surveys from 6030 parents of children who were discharged for a medical condition from 38 hospitals that used the picker institute's pediatric inpatient survey. the pediatric inpatient survey measures 7 dimensions of inpatient care quality: partnership, coordination, information to parent, information to child, physical comfort, confidence and trust, and continuity and transition. our main outcome measures included an overall quality of care rating (1 = poor, 5 = excellent), as well as overall and dimension-specific problem scores (0 = no problems, 100 = problems with 100% of processes asked about in the survey). we used pearson correlation to determine the strength of association between the overall quality of care rating and dimension problem scores. we tested for associations between hospital characteristics and problem scores using linear regression models, controlling for patient health status and other socioeconomic status variables. parents on average rated their child's care as very good (mean: 4.2) but reported problems with 27% of the survey's hospital process measures. information to the child (33%) and coordination of care (30%) had the highest problem rates. parent communication problems correlated most strongly with overall quality of care ratings (r = -0.49). parents of children who were hospitalized at academic health centers (ahcs) reported 4% more problems overall (29.8% vs 25.5%) and almost 9% more problems with coordination of care (34.1% vs 25.6%) compared with those at non-ahcs. parents in more competitive markets reported almost 3% more problems than those in the less competitive ones (28.9% vs 26.3%). the freestanding children's hospital classification was not associated with overall problem scores. we found wide variation in problem scores by hospital, even among ahcs. hospital and patient characteristics explained only 6% of the variance in problem scores. despite high subjective ratings of quality of care, measures of specific processes of care reveal significant variations among hospitals and identify areas with opportunities for improvement. improving the quality of communication with the parent of a hospitalized child may have the most positive impact on a hospital's overall quality of care rating. ahcs and hospitals in more competitive markets may be more prone to problems. with wide variation in parental perceptions of hospital quality of care, a systems analysis of individual hospitals may provide strategies for hospitals to deliver higher quality care.

little is known about the independent long-term effect on growth of exposure to maternal human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection. growth patterns in uninfected children who are born to infected mothers have not been described in detail previously beyond early childhood, and patterns over age for infected and uninfected children have not been based on appropriate general population standards. in vertically hiv-infected children, poor growth has been suggested to be an early marker of infection or progression of disease. however, whether growth faltering is an independent hiv-related symptom or caused indirectly by other hiv clinical symptoms requires clarification. this information is needed to inform the debate on a possible effect of antiretroviral combination therapy on the height of infected children and would provide evidence for the use of specific interventions to improve height. the objective of this study was to describe growth (height and weight) patterns in infected and uninfected children who are born to hiv-infected mothers with respect to standards from a general population and to assess age-related differences in height and weight by infection status, allowing for birth weight, gestational age, gender, hiv-related clinical status, and antiretroviral therapy (art). since 1987, children who were born to hiv-infected mothers in 11 centers in 8 european countries were enrolled at birth in the european collaborative study and followed prospectively according to a standard protocol. height and weight were measured at every visit, scheduled at birth; 3 and 6 weeks; 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 24 months; and every 6 months thereafter. serial measurements of height and weight from birth to 10 years of age of 1403 uninfected and 184 infected children were assessed. we fitted linear mixed effects models allowing for variance changes over age and within-subject correlation using fractional polynomials and natural cubic splines. growth patterns were compared with british 1990 growth standards and by infection status. of the 1587 children enrolled, 810 were male and 777 were female; 1403 were not infected (681 boys, 722 girls), and 184 were infected (88 boys, 96 girls). neither height nor weight was associated significantly with the main effects of hiv infection status at birth, but differences between infected and uninfected children increased with age. uninfected children had normal growth patterns from early ages. infected children were estimated to be significantly shorter and lighter than uninfected children with growth differences increasing with age. differences in growth velocities between the infected and uninfected children increased after 2 years of age for height and after 4 years of age for weight and were more marked in the latter. between 6 and 12 months, uninfected children grew an estimated 1.6% faster in height and 6.2% in weight than infected children; between ages 8 and 10 years, these figures were 16% and 44%, respectively. by 10 years, uninfected children were on average an estimated 7 kg heavier and 7.5 cm taller than infected children. growth in uninfected children who were born before 1994, before the widespread use of art prophylaxis to reduce vertical transmission, did not substantially differ from that of children who were born after 1994. to investigate whether the growth differences between infected and uninfected children were associated with hiv disease progression, we analyzed growth of infected children using the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) clinical classification, in 3 groups: no symptoms, mild or moderate symptoms (a and b), and severe symptoms (c or death). infected children with mild or serious symptoms lagged behind asymptomatic children in both height and weight, and these differences increased with age. infected children who were born before availability of art, before 1988, were more likely to reach a weight below the third centile for age than children who were born after 1994 when effective hiv treatment was widely available. of the 184 infected children, 67 had been weighed and/or measured at least once while on combination (> or = 2 drugs) art. reflecting the longitudinal nature of the european collaborative study and the changing availability of hiv treatment, most of these measurements took place after 7 years of age, and therefore analyzing the possible effect of combination therapy on growth is difficult. the z scores for height and weight gain improved substantially in several children who received combination therapy regardless of their cdc clinical classification. to increase available information, we pooled all measurements according to cdc clinical classification and presence of combination therapy at the time of the observation. weight and height significantly improved for severely ill children after combination therapy. using data from this large prospective european study, we investigated in comparison with general british standards growth patterns in the first 10 years of life of hiv-infected and uninfected children who were born to hiv-infected mothers. the duration of follow-up of uninfected as well as infected children makes this a unique data set. we allowed for repeated measurements for each child and the increase of variability in height and weight with age. growth faltering may be related to the social environment, and our finding that uninfected children have normal growth, which is unaffected by exposure to maternal hiv infection, is consistent with observations that in europe the hiv-infected population is more like the general population and less socioeconomically disadvantaged than that in the united states. however, hiv-infected children grew considerably slower, and differences between infected and uninfected children increased with age. growth patterns in asymptomatic infected children were similar to those with only mild or moderate symptoms. however, compared with these 2 groups combined, severely ill children had poorer growth at all ages. although limited by the small number of children who received combination therapy, severely ill children may benefit from such therapy in terms of improvements in weight and, to a smaller extent, in height. growth faltering, particularly stunting, may adversely affect a child's quality of life, especially once they reach adolescence, and this should be taken into account when making decisions about starting and changing art. additional research will help to elucidate the relationship between combination therapy and improved growth, in particular regarding different regimens and the best timing of initiation for optimizing growth of infected children.

this study examined the factors that affect children's receipt of recommended well-child and dental visits using nationally representative data. we analyzed the child public use file of the 1999 national survey of america's families, including 35 938 children who were younger than 18 years. bivariate and multivariate analyses were conducted to examine the relationship between dependent variables, including receipt of well-child visits as recommended by the american academy of pediatrics' periodicity schedule and dental visits as recommended by the american academy of pediatric dentistry and bright futures, and independent variables, including health status and sociodemographic and economic indicators. overall, 23.4% of children did not receive the recommended well-child visits, whereas 46.8% did not receive the recommended number of dental visits. the factors that predict nonreceipt of care differed for well-child and dental care and with child's age. logistic regression reveals that children who were young (<10 years old), uninsured, non-hispanic white, had a parent who was less than college educated, or in poor health were least likely to meet the recommendations for well-child care. children who did not meet the dental recommendation were more likely to be black, uninsured, from families with low incomes, have a parent who was less than college educated, and have postponed dental care in the last year. these risk factors increased with children's age. a substantial proportion of us children do not receive preventive care according to professionally recommended standards, particularly dental care. publicly insured children experience higher rates of recommended well-child visits; however, much improvement is needed among public programs in providing recommended dental care, especially among adolescents and children in poor general health.

poor reimbursement of pediatricians for behavioral and developmental services and the disarray of children's mental health services in the state led leaders of the north carolina chapter of the american academy of pediatrics to organize an advocacy effort with the following objectives: 1) to articulate pediatricians' perspective on the current crisis in delivering and coordinating children's behavioral health services; 2) to represent the collective voice of both academic and community pediatricians in dialogue with mental health providers, medicaid leaders, and the health and mental health segments of state government; 3) to build consensus about an achievable plan of action to address pediatricians' reimbursement and systems issues; 4) to develop a full and appropriate role for pediatricians as providers and, potentially, coordinators of behavioral health care; and 5) to facilitate implementation of medicaid changes, as a first step in carrying out this plan. this article describes the 24-month process that achieved these objectives.

pediatric residency training programs need regular revision, but there is little evidence to support changes. the recent reduction in time spent in the newborn nursery may negatively affect the care of infants in pediatric practice. this survey was undertaken to assess the preparation of recent graduates of training programs with respect to newborn care in their current practice. a nationwide survey was sent to 1997 pediatric residency graduates in may 1999. the american medical association masterfile was used to identify pediatricians who met the criteria. the survey included questions about preparation and confidence in topics obtained from the residency review committee guidelines for the newborn nursery. there were questions about duration of nursery experience, learning barriers, teaching preferences, current nursery responsibility, and practice location along with other information about the respondents. after 2 mailings, 801 surveys were received. practice distribution was comparable to those who took the pediatric boards for the first time in 1997, and response was nationwide. overall, 45% attend deliveries and 71% care for sick newborns. respondents with only 1 month of normal newborn nursery felt this was insufficient preparation. bedside teaching by faculty members was rated most highly. the most commonly rated areas of poor preparation were prenatal visits, perinatal infections, and management of breastfeeding issues. the current structure of nursery training in many residency programs may be insufficient preparation for primary care practice. results of this and future surveys of recent graduates provide evidence to direct changes in residency training.

ankyloglossia in breastfeeding infants can cause ineffective latch, inadequate milk transfer, and maternal nipple pain, resulting in untimely weaning. the question of whether the performance of a frenuloplasty benefits the breastfeeding dyad in such a situation remains controversial. we wished to 1) define significant ankyloglossia, 2) determine the incidence in breastfeeding infants, and 3) measure the effectiveness of the frenuloplasty procedure with respect to solving specific breastfeeding problems in mother-infant dyads who served as their own controls. we examined 2763 breastfeeding inpatient infants and 273 outpatient infants with breastfeeding problems for possible ankyloglossia and assessed each infant with ankyloglossia, using the hazelbaker assessment tool for lingual frenulum function. we then observed each dyad while breastfeeding. when latch problems were seen, we asked the mother to describe the sensation and quality of the suck at the breast. when pain was described, we asked the mother to grade her pain on a scale of 1 to 10. when lingual function was impaired, we discussed the frenuloplasty procedure with the parent(s) and obtained informed consent. after the procedure, the infants were returned to their mothers for breastfeeding. infant latch and maternal nipple pain were reassessed at this time. ankyloglossia was diagnosed in 88 (3.2%) of the inpatients and in 35 (12.8%) of the outpatients. mean hazelbaker scores were similar for the presenting symptoms of poor latch and nipple pain. median infant age (25th and 75th percentiles) at presentation was lower for poor latch than for nipple pain: 1.2 days (0.7, 2.0) versus 2.0 days (1.0, 12.0), respectively. all frenuloplasties were performed without incident. latch improved in all cases, and maternal pain levels fell significantly after the procedure: 6.9 +/- 2.31 down to 1.2 +/- 1.52. ankyloglossia is a relatively common finding in the newborn population and represents a significant proportion of breastfeeding problems. poor infant latch and maternal nipple pain are frequently associated with this finding. careful assessment of the lingual function, followed by frenuloplasty when indicated, seems to be a successful approach to the facilitation of breastfeeding in the presence of significant ankyloglossia.

hunger, with its adverse consequences for children, continues to be an important national problem. previous studies that document the deleterious effects of hunger among children cannot distinguish child from family hunger and do not take into account some critical environmental, maternal, and child variables that may influence child outcomes. this study examines the independent contribution of child hunger on children's physical and mental health and academic functioning, when controlling for a range of environmental, maternal, and child factors that have also been associated with poor outcomes among children. with the use of standardized tools, comprehensive demographic, psychosocial, and health data were collected in worcester, massachusetts, from homeless and low-income housed mothers and their children (180 preschool-aged children and 228 school-aged children). mothers and children were part of a larger unmatched case-control study of homelessness among female-headed households. hunger was measured by a set of 7 dichotomous items, each asking the mother whether she has or her children have experienced a particular aspect of hunger during the past year--1 concerns food insecurity for the entire family, 2 concern adult hunger, and 4 involve child hunger. the items, taken from the childhood hunger identification project measure, are summed to classify the family and divided into 3 categories: no hunger, adult or moderate child hunger, or severe child hunger (indicating multiple signs of child hunger). outcome measures included children's chronic health condition count using questions adapted from the national health interview survey, child health supplement, and internalizing behavior problems and anxiety/depression, measured by the child behavior checklist. additional covariates included demographic variables (ie, age, gender, ethnicity, housing status, number of moves, family size, income), low birth weight, child life events (ie, care and protection order, out of home placement, abuse, severe life events count), developmental problems (ie, developmental delay, learning disability, emotional problems), and mother's distress and psychiatric illness. multivariate regression analyses examined the effect of child hunger on physical and mental health outcomes. the average family size for both preschoolers and school-aged children was 3; about one third of both groups were white and 40% puerto rican. the average income of families was approximately $11 000. among the school-aged children, on average 10 years old, 50% experienced moderate child hunger and 16% severe child hunger. compared with those with no hunger, school-aged children with severe hunger were more likely to be homeless (56% vs 29%), have low birth weights (23% vs 6%), and have more stressful life events (9 vs 6) when compared with those with no hunger. school-aged children with severe hunger scores had parent-reported anxiety scores that were more than double the scores for children with no hunger and significantly higher chronic illness counts (3.4 vs 1.8) and internalizing behavior problems when compared with children with no hunger. there was no relationship between hunger and academic achievement. among preschool-aged children, who averaged 4 years of age, 51% experienced moderate child hunger and 8% severe child hunger. for preschoolers, compared with children with no hunger, severe hunger was associated with homelessness (75% vs 48%), more traumatic life events (8.5 vs 6), low birth weight (23% vs 6%), and higher levels of chronic illness and internalizing behavior problems. mothers of both preschoolers and school-aged children who reported severe hunger were more likely to have a lifetime diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder. for school-aged children, severe hunger was a significant predictor of chronic illness after controlling for housing status, mother's distress, low birth weight, and child live events. for preschoolers, moderate hunger was a significant predictor of health conditions while controlling for potenns while controlling for potential explanatory factors. for both preschoolers and school-aged children, severe child hunger was associated with higher levels of internalizing behavior problems. after controlling for housing status, mother's distress, and stressful life events, severe child hunger was also associated with higher reported anxiety/depression among school-aged children. this study goes beyond previous research and highlights the independent relationship between severe child hunger and adverse physical health and mental health outcomes among low-income children. study findings underscore the importance of clinical recognition of child hunger and its outcomes, allowing for preventive interventions and efforts to increase access to food-related resources for families.

to describe the extent of adherence to the recommended neonatal zidovudine (zdv) regimen administered to infants who have been exposed to the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) to prevent mother-to-child transmission of hiv and to determine which maternal factors are associated with compliance. hiv-infected women (n = 87) who were participating in a larger study of perinatal transmission at 3 inner-city new york city hospitals were interviewed 2 to 6 weeks' postpartum to assess adherence to neonatal prophylaxis, social support, social network factors, and depression. in addition, plasma samples of 45 of their infants were assayed for zdv levels. a majority of women (71%) administered all of the prescribed 4 daily doses in the previous week, as measured by interview; self-reported adherence was not associated with any maternal characteristics. in contrast, poor adherence, as measured by lower infant zdv plasma levels, was associated with asymptomatic hiv illness in the mother and having 2 or more other children; good adherence, as indicated by higher zdv levels, was associated with the presence of a maternal social support network, disclosure of hiv infection, and mothers' adherence to their own zdv regimens during pregnancy. in multivariate regression analyses, maternal asymptomatic status (beta = -0.40) was associated with lower infant zdv levels, and maternal adherence during pregnancy (beta = 0.37) was associated with higher levels. women who are hiv asymptomatic and lack a social support network are more likely not to comply with the recommended neonatal prophylactic regimen of antiretroviral therapy. future studies should address the prenatal period and social network factors, such as disclosure of serostatus, and the custody of other children.

severe pneumococcal infections have been associated with hemolytic uremic syndrome (hus), usually with a poor clinical outcome when compared with escherichia coli o157 gastroenteritis-associated (d+) hus. we examined our experience with 12 cases of streptococcus pneumoniae-associated hus (sp-hus) and compare it with a cohort of diarrhea-associated hus (d+ hus). a retrospective case survey compared 2 unrelated groups of hus patients. demographic factors, clinical indices of disease severity, and outcome were used to compare the 2 groups of hus patients. twelve children with sp-hus were studied. pneumococcal pneumonia with empyema was the most common precipitating illness (67%), pneumococcal meningitis was present in 17% of children, pneumonia with bacteremia in 8%, and both pneumonia and meningitis in 8%. sp-hus patients were younger than d+ hus patients (22.1 vs 49 months) and had more severe renal and hematologic disease than d+ hus patients. compared with d+ hus patients, sp-hus patients were more likely to require dialysis (75% vs 59%) and had a longer duration of hospitalization (33.2 vs 16.1 days) and duration of thrombocytopenia (11.6 vs 6.8 days). sp-hus patients were also more likely to require platelet transfusions (83% vs 47%) and needed more platelet (4.7 vs 0.5) and packed red blood cell transfusions (7.8 vs 2.0). the 2 groups did not differ significantly in the incidence of extrarenal hus complications. there were no deaths in either group. seven patients have been seen for long-term follow-up; 2 developed end-stage renal disease, and 5 have normal renal function. hus is a rare but severe complication of invasive pneumococcal infection. although disseminated intravascular coagulation can also occur in these children, the treatment and follow-up may be different in the 2 conditions. children with pneumococcal disease and severe hematologic or renal abnormalities should be investigated for evidence of hus.

to determine the causes and preventability of child deaths; to assess the accuracy of death certificate information; and to assess the number of child abuse deaths that are misdiagnosed as deaths attributable to natural or accidental causes. analysis of deaths of children <18 years old that occurred between 1995-1999 using the data collected by the arizona child fatality review program (acfrp). from 1995-1999, local multidisciplinary child fatality review teams (cfrts) have reviewed 95% of all deaths of children <18 years old in arizona. each team has access to the child's death certificate, autopsy report, hospital records, child protective services records, law enforcement reports, and any other relevant documents that provide insight into the cause and preventability of a child's death. after reviewing these documents, the team determines the cause of death, its preventability, and the accuracy of the death certificate. the acfrp defines a child's death as preventable if an individual or the community could reasonably have done something that would have changed the circumstances that led to the child's death. the acfrp determined that 29% (1416/4806) of these deaths could have been prevented, and preventability increased with the age of the child. only 5% (81/1781) of neonatal deaths were considered preventable, whereas the deaths of 38% of all children older than 28 days were considered preventable. by 9 years of age, the majority of child deaths (56%) were considered preventable. deaths attributable to medical conditions were far less likely to be considered preventable than deaths attributable to unintentional injuries. although 62% of all deaths in arizona during the 5-year period were attributable to medical conditions, only 8% (253/2983) of these deaths were considered preventable. in contrast, 91% (852/934) of the deaths attributable to unintentional injuries were considered preventable. motor vehicle crashes accounted for 634 of the deaths resulting from injuries, and drowning accounted for 187 deaths. motor vehicle crashes were the leading cause of death for all children in arizona over 1 year of age. only 18% of child passengers and 3% of adolescent drivers who died were known to be appropriately restrained. the typical drowning victim was a young child who drowned in the family's backyard pool. indeed, 70% (131/187) of the drowning victims were <5 years old, and 62% (81/131) of these children died in a backyard pool. supervision of the child and pool fencing could have prevented 90% of these deaths. most deaths attributable to medical conditions occurred in the first year of life. prematurity was the most common medical condition (1036 deaths) followed by congenital anomalies (662 deaths) and infectious diseases (470 deaths). some of the reasons why cfrts believed a medical death was preventable included inadequate emergency medical services, poor continuity of care, and delay in seeking care because of lack of health insurance. there were 4 deaths resulting from infections that were vaccine-preventable. there were 263 deaths attributable to sudden infant death syndrome. only 38 of these infants were found lying on their back; 35 were found lying on their side. the death rate from sudden infant death syndrome decreased from 1.1 per 1000 infants <1 year of age in 1995 to 0.5 in 1999. there were 33 deaths that the cfrts concluded were attributable to unsafe sleeping arrangements that resulted in unintentional suffocation. from 1995-1999, 317 arizona children died from gun shot wounds. most of these deaths were homicides (175) or suicides (109). all suicide deaths occurred in children >9 years old, and 77% of these children were >14 years old. the typical suicide victim was male (83%) and used a gun (70%) to kill himself. after review by the cfrts, it was determined that 5 of the 67 child abuse deaths were misdiagnosed as attributable to natural or accidental causes on the death certificate. in 3 of these 5 cases, the child was in a persistent vegetative state and died many years after the episode of child abuse. although inaction or inappropriate action by child protective services (cps) is often thought to be the cause of child abuse deaths, the acfrp determined that in 79% of child abuse deaths, there had been no previous cps involvement with the child's family. although 61% of child abuse deaths were considered to be preventable, much of the responsibility for preventing these deaths rests with community members (eg, relatives, neighbors) who were aware of the abuse but failed to report the family to cps. the cfrts, who had received training in the proper completion of death certificates, reported that the cause of death was incorrect on 13% of all death certificates and in 16 cases, the cfrts disagreed with the medical examiner on the manner of death (eg, natural, accidental, undetermined). because cfrts have access to additional information that may not have been available to the physician who completes a child's death certificate, cfrts may be able to more accurately determine the cause and manner of death than the physician who completed the death certificate. arizona's child death rate is above the national average (82.16/100 000), but the acfrp determined that many of these deaths could have been prevented by using known prevention strategies (eg, child safety restraints, pool fencing). most child mortality data are based on death certificate information that often is incorrect and cannot be used to assess preventability. although most states have child fatality review programs that review suspected child abuse deaths, <3% of all preventable deaths in arizona were attributable to child abuse. if all child deaths in the united states were reviewed from a prevention/needs assessment perspective, targeted and data-driven recommendations for prevention could be developed for each community, and potentially 38% of all child deaths that occur after the first month of life could be prevented. the acfrp is an excellent example of a statewide system with a public health focus. to assist other states in developing similar programs, national support is needed. the establishment of a public health focused federally funded national program would provide us with the opportunity to standardize data collection among states and better utilize this data at a national level.

morbidity from asthma among children is one of the most important us health concerns. this study examines the relationship of baseline nonadherence to subsequent asthma morbidity among inner-city children. a multisite, prospective, longitudinal panel study was conducted of 1199 children who were aged 4 to 9 years and had asthma and their caregivers, most of whom were parents, in emergency departments and clinics at 8 research centers in 7 us metropolitan inner-city areas. nine morbidity indicators were collected at 3, 6, and 9 months after baseline, including hospitalizations, unscheduled visits, days of wheeze/cough, and days of reduced activities. children whose caregivers scored high on a new measure, admitted nonadherence, experienced significantly worse morbidity on 8 of the 9 measures. children who scored high on a new risk for nonadherence measure experienced significantly worse morbidity on all 9 morbidity measures. multiple and logistic regressions found that the adherence measures had independent significant effects on morbidity. combining the measures improved estimates of morbidity: children whose caregivers were poor on either adherence measure had worse morbidity than those with good adherence on both, eg, rate of hospitalization was twice as high, they missed more than twice as much school, had poorer overall functioning, and experienced more days of wheezing and more restricted days of activity. risk for nonadherence and admitted nonadherence independently and jointly predicted subsequent asthma morbidity. targeting risks for nonadherence may be an effective intervention strategy. most risks can be controlled by physicians through reducing the complexity of asthma regimens, communicating effectively with caregivers about medication use, and correcting family misconceptions about asthma medication side effects.

infants and toddlers with cystic fibrosis (cf) are at risk for poor growth. controlled behavioral assessment studies have not focused on this population. this study compared calorie intake, percentage of recommended daily allowance (rda) per day and per kilogram, and percentage of calories from fat, protein, and carbohydrates between infants and toddlers with cf and healthy peers. also, eating behaviors, such as meal duration, bites and sips per minute, percentage of meal spent eating, children's problematic eating behaviors, and parents' perceptions of mealtime behaviors were compared between infants and toddlers with cf and controls. five hypotheses were tested. 1) infants and toddlers with cf would be comparable to controls on the number of calories consumed per day and the percentage of calories from fat. 2) infants and toddlers with cf would not meet the cf dietary guidelines for the percentage of rda for calories or the percentage of calories from fat. 3) infants and toddlers with cf would have longer meal durations than healthy peers, but would not differ on the pace of eating, the number of calories consumed during the meal, or the percentage of time spent eating during the meal. 4) parents of infants and toddlers with cf would perceive more problematic mealtime behavior than controls. 5) parents' perceptions of children's mealtime behavior would positively correlate with meal duration and negatively correlate with the number of calories consumed during the meal. a 2-group comparison study. a clinical sample of 35 infants and toddlers with cf (m = 18.6; standard deviation = 8.1 months; range = 7-35 months) and a community sample of 34 healthy peers matched for age, gender, socioeconomic status, and number of parents and siblings present during mealtimes. children's calorie intake was measured using 3-day diet diaries. the 2 groups did not differ on the total number of calories consumed per day, the percentage of calories derived from fat, or the percentage of rda consumed per day. infants and toddlers with cf were not meeting the cf dietary recommendations of 120% to 150% rda for energy with 40% of calories coming from fat. using the dyadic interaction nomenclature for eating, a behavioral coding system, videotaped recordings of children's dinner meals were scored for meal duration, number of bites and sips per minute, number of calories per bite or sip, and the percentage of 10-second intervals with bites and sips. the cf sample had significantly longer mealtimes (20.2 minutes) than the control group (16.4 minutes), but did not differ on calories consumed at the meal, bites and sips per minute, calories per bite and sip, or time spent eating during the meal. on the behavioral pediatrics feeding assessment scale, a measure of parental perceptions of mealtime behavior that was completed by a subset of families (39 families), parents of infants and toddlers with cf endorsed a greater number of mealtime behaviors as problems and a higher occurrence of problems than did parents of controls. examples of these behaviors for the cf sample included problems with their child's willingness to try new foods (48%), eat vegetables (48%), and observations that their child has a poor appetite (32%) and would rather drink than eat (32%). parents of children with cf chose a greater number of mealtime strategies and feelings as problems and reported more frequently using problematic strategies at mealtimes than did parents of controls. examples of problematic strategies and feelings for parents of infants and toddlers with cf included feeling anxious/frustrated when feeding their children (37%), not feeling confident that their child eats enough (32%), and using coaxing to get their child to take a bite (26%). for the entire sample, a positive correlation of 0.29 was found between the number of mealtime behavior problems reported by parents and meal duration, suggesting the co-occurrence of problematic mealtime behavior with longer meal duration. no relationship was found between the number of child mealtime behavior problems reported by parents and the number of calories consumed during the filmed meal. for the cf sample, a correlation of -0.26 between children's weight percentile for age and the filmed meal duration was found, suggesting a tendency for meal duration to increase as children's weight for age decreases. post-hoc analyses were conducted comparing infants and toddlers with previously reported samples of preschool and school-aged children on meal duration. results demonstrated that in each group, children with cf had longer meals than age-matched controls. our findings reveal significant deficits in achieving dietary recommendations for many families of infants and toddlers with cf. only 11% of infants and toddlers with cf met the cf dietary recommendation of at least 120% of the rda/day for energy. in addition, infants and toddlers were found to derive only 34% of their daily calories from fat, compared with the recommended 40% needed for a moderate to high fat diet. these results underscore the need for intervention in families of infants and toddlers with cf, who in addition to being at increased risk for malnutrition, may also experience a hastening in the decline of their pulmonary status because of poor nutritional status. currently, there is limited programmatic research on nutritional and feeding interventions for toddlers and infants with cf. one study, which used a hospital-based behavioral education program to increase the caloric intake of 3 children (ages 10-20 months) who were below the fifth percentile for weight for length, found at least a 54% increase in calories for each child after treatment. similarly, preliminary findings of 2 parent-based interventions, a nutrition education curriculum and a nutrition education plus behavior parent-training curriculum, found a 22% and 32% increase in daily calories, respectively, at treatment completion. a large-scale clinical trial is needed to evaluate the efficacy of any nutritional intervention before widespread dissemination. additional assessment-focused research is also needed to identify patients' who may be at greatest risk for malnutrition and to guide the development of interventions to treat them.

pharmaceutical costs have reached 14% of total health care costs in the united states and continue to rise. many studies have looked at factors that influence utilization of hospital and ambulatory care services in the pediatric population. this study examines the factors that influence utilization of prescription drugs in the pediatric population. data from the 1996 medical expenditure panel survey (meps) were used in the analysis. a 2-part multivariate regression analysis was conducted using pediatric (ages 0-17) prescription drug expenditures as the dependent variable. independent variables were constructed using demographic variables, socioeconomic variables, health status, and medical conditions. black children are less likely than white children to use any prescription drug (odds ratio: 0.67). similarly, uninsured children are less likely than privately insured children to use any prescription drug (odds ratio: 0.62). among children who had any prescription drug expenditure in 1996, children who are black, asian, and hispanic had lower prescription drug expenditures than children who are white. children who are uninsured had lower expenditures than children who are privately insured. children in near-poor families had lower prescription drug expenditures than those in high-income families, even after controlling for insurance status. children who are covered by medicaid had comparable prescription drug expenditures to children who are covered by private insurance. socioeconomic characteristics such as race, insurance status, and family income levels had significant impact on pediatric prescription drug expenditures, even after controlling for the influences of health status and medical conditions.

umbilical artery catheters are an essential aid in the treatment of newborn infants who have cardiopulmonary disease. however, it is well-known that umbilical artery catheterization is associated with complications. the most frequent visible problem in an umbilical line is blanching or cyanosis of part or all of a distal extremity or the buttock area resulting from either vasospasm or a thrombotic or embolic incidence. ischemic necrosis of the gluteal region is a rare complication of umbilical artery catheterization. we report the case of a full-term infant of an insulin-dependent diabetic mother with poor blood glucose control who developed a left peroneal nerve palsy after ischemic necrosis of the gluteal region after umbilical artery catheterization. the infant was born weighing 5050 g. the mother of the infant had preexisting diabetes mellitus that was treated with insulin from the age of 14 years. the metabolic control of the mother had been unstable both before and during the pregnancy. the neonate developed respiratory distress syndrome soon after birth and was immediately transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit. mechanical ventilation via endotracheal tube was quickly considered necessary after rapid pulmonary deterioration. her blood glucose levels were 13 mg/dl. a 3.5-gauge umbilical catheter was inserted into the left umbilical artery for blood sampling without difficulty when the infant required 100% oxygen to maintain satisfactory arterial oxygen pressure. femoral pulses and circulation in the lower limbs were normal immediately before and after catheterization. a radiograph, which was taken immediately, showed the tip of the catheter to be at a level between the fourth and fifth sacral vertebrae. the catheter was removed immediately. circulation and femoral pulses were normal and no blanching of the skin was observed. another catheter was repositioned and the tip was confirmed radiologically to be in the thoracic aorta between the sixth and seventh thoracic vertebrae. the catheter was continuously flushed with heparinized solution. three days after umbilical arterial catheterization, bruising was observed over the left gluteal region. the catheter was immediately removed despite its correct position. over the next few days, the bruised skin and underlying tissues became necrotic. the area affected was 3 x 4 cm in diameter, with central necrosis surrounded by a rim of dark, red skin, which, in turn, was sharply demarcated from normal skin by a narrow, pale zone. surgical excision of the gluteal necrosis was performed, but a deep ulcer 3 cm in diameter was left. the gluteal ulcer required 1 month to heal completely with extensive scar tissue formation. throughout this period, the infant showed active movements in all of her limbs. at 4 weeks of age deterioration of all movement below the left knee with a dropping foot was observed. severe peroneal nerve palsy was confirmed through nerve conduction studies, and there was electromyographic evidence of degeneration of the muscles supplied by the peroneal branch of the sciatic nerve. a doppler study, which was also conducted, revealed no vascular damage. treatment with physiotherapy and night-splinting of the left ankle was instituted. repeated examination and nerve conduction tests at 3 months showed slow improvement with the left peroneal nerve remaining nonexcitable. at the time of this writing, the infant is 6 months old, and muscular strength below the left knee is still weak and atrophic changes in the form of muscle-wasting are already present. the rest of her motor development is normal. in our case, gangrene of the buttocks and sciatic nerve palsy followed displacement of the tip of the catheter into the inferior gluteal artery, a main branch of the internal iliac artery supplying the gluteus maximus, the overlying skin, and the sciatic nerve. the gangrenous changes were probably caused by vascular occlusion resulting from catheter-induced vasospasm of the inferior gluteal artery. sciatic nerve palsy associated with umbilical artery catheterization has been postulated to be caused by vascular occlusion of the inferior gluteal artery. infants of diabetic mothers may exhibit changes in coagulation factors and be at increased risk of thrombotic complications in utero and postnatally. in addition, maternal diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased incidence of congenital abnormalities, the incidence of which is 3 to 5 times higher than that among nondiabetic mothers. although no particular or specific abnormalities have been associated with maternal disabilities, abnormalities of the cardiovascular system, including the development of umbilical vessels, frequently occur. this complication of umbilical artery catheterization has not been widely reported. we describe the first case that refers to gluteal gangrene and peroneal nerve palsy after umbilical artery catheterization of a newborn infant of a diabetic mother with poor blood glucose control. it should be noted that there were no contributing factors except that of the displacement of the catheter into the inferior gluteal artery. we speculate that the displacement of the tip of the catheter, with no difficulty in the present case, was associated with the maldevelopment of normal branching patterns of arteries after exposure of the fetus to hyperglycemia. in conclusion, umbilical artery catheterization is possibly associated with vascular occlusion, particularly in infants of diabetic mothers. frequent inspection after the procedure has been performed is of the utmost importance especially in these neonates who often suffer from cardiopulmonary disease and require catheterization of their umbilical artery.

the complexity of highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart), with multiple medications, formulations, and dosing intervals, makes adherence challenging. little is known about the adherence of children to haart. the objective of this study was to identify correlates of adherence to haart and the relationship between adherence and study outcomes in a pediatric clinical trial. pediatric aids clinical trials group 377 is a phase i/ii randomized trial of 4 haart regimens in antiretroviral-experienced, clinically stable children aged 4 months to 17 years. the 4 treatment arms include various 3- or 4-drug combinations of d4t, 3tc, nevirapine, ritonavir, and nelfinavir. after informed consent was obtained, 193 children were enrolled between december 1997 and september 1998. questionnaires were developed to collect subject- or caregiver-reported adherence to study medications and to identify problems associated with medication administration. every 3 months, the number of doses of each medication missed during the 3 days preceding the study visit was recorded. full adherence (fa) and non-full adherence were defined as missing no doses and missing at least 1 dose, respectively. adherence data from study week 48 or the most recent study visit were available for 125 children (week 48 for 109 children). overall, 70% of children reported fa and 30% reported non-full adherence. adherence did not differ by treatment arm, age, or the child's knowledge of his or her human immunodeficiency virus infection status. there was a suggestion that adherence was less for white than nonwhite children (40% vs 73% fa) and did not differ between black and hispanic children. rates of fa were 82% for d4t, 79% for 3tc, 83% for nevirapine, 84% for ritonavir, and 68% for nelfinavir. despite the similar rates of fa, difficulties with taking specific medications were reported most frequently for ritonavir and nelfinavir. these included poor taste, patient refusal, and scheduling problems. adherence was associated with the virologic response: fa was seen in 92% of children with > or =2 log10 drop in viral load and in 64% with <2 log10 drop in viral load. in children, reported adherence predicts the virologic response to haart therapy and is a useful measure of adherence. interventions and regimens to increase adherence to haart should result in an improved outcome.

previous research reported that breast milk lactic acid (la) levels increase after lactating women complete a bout of exhaustive exercise, resulting in poor infant acceptance of the postexercise breast milk. this highly publicized finding may not apply to more practical, everyday exercise conditions of lactating women. the purpose of the present study was to reexamine the composition and infant acceptance of postexercise breast milk while controlling maternal diet, exercise intensity, and the method, timing, and assessment of infant feeding. twenty-four women, 2 to 4 months' postpartum, completed 3 test sessions: a maximal oxygen uptake test, a 30-minute bout of moderate exercise, and a resting control session. one hour before and 1 hour after each session, participants fully expressed their milk, placed it in a bottle familiar to the infant, fed their infant, and rated their infant's acceptance of the milk. each feeding was videotaped and viewed individually by 3 lactation consultants who rated infant acceptance; consultants were blinded to the test sessions. milk was analyzed for la and infant milk consumption was measured. there were no differences in presession versus postsession values for maternal skin temperature, breast milk temperature, and infant milk acceptance as judged by either the mothers or lactation consultants. these results prevailed despite a small but significant increase in breast milk la premaximal versus postmaximal exercise (0.09 vs 0.21 mm, respectively); there was no difference in milk la premoderate versus postmoderate exercise, or prerest versus postrest. these data support the hypothesis that moderate or even high-intensity exercise during lactation does not impede infant acceptance of breast milk consumed 1 hour postexercise.

there has been a major increase in the incidence of hypospadias in infants in the 1990s, but the risk factors are not known. although there are scattered reports in the literature regarding the association of low birth weight and hypospadias, this has not been systematically studied. the objective of this study was to determine the association between early gestation intrauterine growth and hypospadias. a retrospective review of 13 years of admissions to 2 tertiary care neonatal intensive care units (nicus) in connecticut (1987--2000) showed that 112 (1.66%) of 6746 male infants had any degree of hypospadias. of these, 8 were part of a genetic syndrome and were excluded. a retrospective cohort analysis of these 6738 infants was performed. infant growth parameters at birth (weight, head circumference, and length) were analyzed along with maternal risk factors known to be associated with changes in fetal growth, including maternal age, race, diagnosis of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and maternal use of alcohol or tobacco or substance abuse during pregnancy. the incidence of hypospadias in the nicu population increased 10-fold from 0.4% in 1987 to 4% in the first quarter of 2000. hypospadias was significantly more common in infants who had uniformly poor intrauterine growth (<10th percentiles) in the various parameters measured: birth weight, length, or head circumference. there were no significant differences in maternal age or race, nor were there differences in the use of alcohol, tobacco, or street drugs by the mother. there were no differences between singletons and multiple-gestation births. however, the frequency of occurrence was significantly higher among first-born infants (1.9%) compared with all other infants (0.9%). the incidence of hypospadias in our nicu population has increased 10-fold during the 13-year period of study. there was a significant association of hypospadias with poor intrauterine growth. the growth restriction was probably of early gestational cause as there was proportionate involvement of somatic (weight and length) and brain growth (head circumference). the increasing frequency of hypospadias and its association with poor intrauterine growth originating in early gestation suggests that common environmental factor(s) that have an impact on both conditions may be involved.

current medical therapy for congenital adrenal hyperplasia (cah) attributable to a complete 21-hydroxylase deficiency is not optimal. difficulties in adequate adrenal androgen suppression are common, causing short adult stature, infertility, and hyperandrogenism. we report the use of laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy as a definitive therapy for this condition and argue that it is superior to conventional medical therapy in selected patients. participants were 2 adult females with classic, salt-wasting cah and a history of poor adrenal control were selected for adrenalectomy: case 1 was a 22-year-old woman with mild hirsutism and primary amenorrhea; case 2 was a 28-year-old woman with severe hirsutism, acne, and amenorrhea. preoperative and postoperative hormonal profiles were performed. both underwent laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy with a mean follow-up of 37 months. bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed in both patients with no complications and an uneventful recovery. maintenance medications of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement were reduced compared with preoperative doses. three years postoperatively, however, rising adrenal steroid precursor levels in case 1, presumably caused by adrenal rests, prompted an increase in replacement therapy dose. hirsutism and acne improved in both patients, and regular menstruation began 5 months (case 1) and 2 months (case 2) postoperatively. pregnancy 3 years postoperatively was successful in case 2, who delivered a unaffected infant, full-term via cesarian section. surgical adrenalectomy should be considered in females with classic cah attributable to 21-hydroxylase deficiency and a history of poor hormonal control. adrenalectomy may prove to be superior to current medical therapy for these patients.

growth failure is a common feature of children with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1) infection. children who are treated with mono or dual nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor (nrti) therapy show a temporary increase in weight gain and linear growth rate. in adults, protease-inhibitor-containing antiretroviral therapy is associated with a sustained weight gain and increased body mass index (bmi). experience with protease inhibitors and growth in children is still limited. the data mainly deal with short-term effects on growth. to evaluate the effect of highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart) on growth in children with hiv-1 infection. we analyzed selected growth parameters, clinical data, and laboratory results as part of a prospective, open, uncontrolled, multicenter study to evaluate the clinical, immunologic, and virologic response to haart consisting of indinavir, zidovudine, and lamivudine in children with hiv-1 infection. height and weight were measured at 0, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, and 96 weeks after initiation of haart. information about the children's growth before enrollment in the study was retrieved from the hospital medical records and/or the school doctor or health center. bmi was calculated. z scores were used to express the standard deviation (sd) in sd units from the dutch reference curves for age and gender. viral loads and cd4+ t-cell counts were examined prospectively and related to these growth parameters. z scores were also calculated for cd4+ t-cell counts to correct for age-related differences. a z score of 0 represents the p50, which is exactly the age/sex-appropriate median. a height z score of -1 indicates that a child's height is 1 sd below the age- and gender-specific median height for the normal population. virologic responders were defined as those who either reached an undetectable viral load (<500 copies/ml) or had a >1.5 log reduction in viral load compared with baseline at week 12 after the initiation of haart, which was maintained during the follow-up period. results. twenty-four patients were included (age: 0.4-16.3 years at baseline), with a median hiv-1 rna load of 105 925 copies/ml (5.03 log), a median cd4+ t-cell count of 0.586 x 10(9)/l (median z score: -2.28 sd), a median height z score of -1.22, a median weight z score of -0.74, and a median baseline bmi z score of -0.32. eleven patients were naive to antiretroviral therapy, and 13 patients had received previous treatment with nrti monotherapy. twenty children used indinavir and 4 children used nelfinavir as part of haart. virologic and immunologic responses to haart: seventeen children were virologic responders, and 7 children were virologic nonresponders. in patients naive to nrtis, median baseline viral loads were significantly higher than in pretreated patients. however, at weeks 48 and 96, there was no significant difference between the viral loads of both groups. at baseline, there was no significant difference in cd4+a t-cell z scores between virologic responders and nonresponders or between naive and pretreated patients. during 96 weeks of haart, the increase of cd4+ t-cell z score was significantly higher in responders than in nonresponders. the increase in cd4+ t-cell z score was not significantly different for naive and pretreated patients. height, weight, and bmi z score changes: we found that there was a trend toward a significantly increased z score change during 96 weeks of haart compared with the z score change before haart initiation for height and weight, but not for bmi. growth and virologic response to haart: when the data were analyzed separately for virologic responders and nonresponders, virologic responders showed significant increases in height and weight. the height and weight of virologic nonresponders did not change significantly. the bmi did not change significantly in responders or in nonresponders. growth and immunologic response to haart: the increase of weight and bmi z scores from baseline correlated positively with the cd4+ t-cell z score increase from baseline. it did not correlate with absolute cd4+ t-cell count increase. height z score increase did not correlate with cd4+ t-cell z score or with absolute cd4+ t-cell counts. growth and previous nrti treatment: the height z score decrease from week -48 to baseline was significantly larger in naive than in pretreated patients. the weight and bmi z score change from week -48 to baseline was not significantly different for pretreated and naive patients. from baseline to week 96, the height and weight z score change increased significantly in naive patients but not in pretreated patients compared with the change from week -48 to baseline. the bmi z score did not change significantly over 96 weeks of haart for naive or pretreated patients. growth and clinical stage of infection: the clinical stage of infection according to the centers for disease control and prevention classification correlated negatively with the bmi z score and the weight z score at baseline but not with the height z score. thus, children with the most severe clinical disease had the lowest bmi and weight z scores at baseline. the bmi z score increased more in children with more advanced clinical infection at baseline, who had lower bmi at baseline. the clinical stage of infection did not correlate with the change in weight z score from baseline to week 96. haart has a positive influence effect on the growth of hiv-1-infected children. this effect is sustained for at least 96 weeks. height and weight are favorably influenced in children in whom haart leads to a reduction of the viral load of at least 1.5 log or to <500 copies/ml and to an increase in the cd4+ t-cell z score. in contrast to the increase of the bmi in adults on haart, bmi did not increase in all children effectively treated with haart. bmi increased more in children with an advanced stage of infection and a poor nutritional status at baseline. data from pretreated and naive patients were difficult to interpret, because the baseline characteristics of these 2 groups differed too much.

data regarding pediatric in-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) have been limited because of retrospective study designs, small sample sizes, and inconsistent definitions of cardiac arrest and cpr. the purpose of this study was to prospectively describe and evaluate pediatric in-hospital cpr with the international consensus-derived epidemiologic definitions from the utstein guidelines. all 129 in-hospital cprs during 12 months at a 122-bed university children's hospital in sao paulo, brazil, were described and evaluated using utstein reporting guidelines. these guidelines include standardized descriptions of hospital variables, patient variables, arrest/event variables, and outcome variables. cpr was defined as chest compressions and assisted ventilation provided because of cardiac arrest or because of severe bradycardia with poor perfusion. outcome variables included sustained return of spontaneous circulation, 24-hour survival, 30-day survival, 1-year survival, and neurologic status of survivors by the pediatric cerebral performance category scale. of the 6024 children admitted to the hospital, 176 (3%) had an episode that met the criteria for provision of cpr and 129 (2%) received cpr, 86 for clinical cardiac arrest and 43 for bradycardia with poor perfusion. most of the children (71%) had preexisting chronic diseases. the most common precipitating causes were respiratory failure (61%) and shock (29%). the initial cardiac rhythm was asystole in 71 children (55%), pulseless electrical activity in 12 (9%), ventricular fibrillation in 1, and bradycardia with pulses and poor perfusion in 43 (33%). eighty-three children (64%) attained sustained return of spontaneous circulation (>20 minutes), 43 (33%) were alive at 24 hours, 24 (19%) were alive at 30 days, and 19 (15%) were alive at 1 year. although many factors correlated with 24-hour survival, multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed independent association of 24-hour survival with respiratory failure as the precipitating cause (odds ratio [or]: 4.92; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.73-14.0), bradycardia with pulses as the initial event (or: 2.68; 95% ci: 1.01-7.1), and shorter duration of cpr (or: 0.92; 95% ci: 0.89-0.96 for each elapsed minute). similarly, 30-day survival was independently associated with respiratory failure as the precipitating cause and shorter duration of cpr. thirty-day survival decreased by 5% with each elapsed minute of cpr. nineteen (91%) of the 21 survivors to hospital discharge and 16 (83%) of the 19 1-year survivors had no demonstrable long-term change in neurologic function from their pre-cpr status. during this study, cpr was uncommon but not rare. respiratory failure was the most common precipitating cause, followed by shock. preexisting chronic diseases were prevalent among these children. asystole was the most common initial cardiac rhythm, and bradycardia with pulses and poor perfusion was the second most common. ventricular fibrillation was rare, but children with acute cardiac diseases, such as cardiac surgery and acute cardiomyopathies, were not admitted to this children's hospital. cpr was effective: nearly two thirds of these children were initially successfully resuscitated, and one third were alive at 24 hours compared with imminent death without cpr and advanced life support. nevertheless, survival progressively decreased over time, generally as a result of the underlying disease process. one-year survival was 15%. importantly, most of these survivors had no demonstrable change in gross neurologic function from their pre-cpr status.

increased survival of extremely low birth weight infants depends on the use of indwelling catheters. these catheters expose the infant to the risk of thrombus formation and line infection. when intracardiac thromboses become infected, the entity is indistinguishable from infective endocarditis and exposes the infant to prolonged sepsis and risk of disseminated infected emboli. despite prolonged antiinfective therapy and removal of the infected line, resolution of the sepsis and dissolution of the vegetations is frequently not achieved. we describe 2 cases of infective endocarditis in extremely low birth weight infants successfully treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator in addition to prolonged antiinfective therapy. blood cultures became sterile and vegetations disappeared within days of commencing treatment, and there were no systemic complications. a literature search detailed in the article confirms the poor outcome associated with infectious endocarditis in preterm infants. tissue plasminogen activator may play an important role when standard care has failed.

prognostic factors in juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (jra) include polyarticular onset, polyarticular disease course, and rheumatoid factor positivity; in the systemic onset subtype, persistence of systemic features at 6 months after onset confers a worse prognosis. timely diagnosis and appropriate aggressive treatment of patients with poor prognostic features improve quality of life and outcome. after nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, methotrexate is the most commonly used second-line agent. however, approximately one third of patients do not respond to methotrexate adequately. randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trials in patients with jra are few, but one such trial with the tumor necrosis factor inhibitor etanercept shows that this drug is effective and well-tolerated. other recently approved agents for rheumatoid arthritis, including infliximab, leflunomide, celecoxib, and rofecoxib, have not been adequately studied in pediatric patients, and the role of these agents in children with jra remains to be determined.

varicella-zoster virus (vzv) can cause severe disease in premature neonates. the fetus receives protective maternal vzv-immunoglobulin g (igg) mainly in the third trimester of pregnancy. therefore, premature neonates are considered at risk for vzv infection. administration of varicella-zoster immunoglobulin (vzig) within 96 hours after exposure effectively prevents severe illness in susceptible patients. the objectives of this study were to define the major determinants of the neonatal vzv-igg titer and to determine the half-life of transplacentally acquired vzv-igg. guidelines provided by the centers for disease control and prevention for the use of vzig in (premature) neonates were evaluated. vzv-igg titers were measured in sera of 221 neonates and 43 mothers using a quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. in 27 neonates, vzv-igg titers were followed for up to 14 weeks. in a linear regression model, the maternal antibody titer was the major determinant of the neonatal titer (beta = 0.89); gestational age was only of minor importance (beta = 0.18). the median half-life of vzv-igg in neonates was 25.5 days (range: 14.6-76.0 days). in the first weeks of life, major fluctuations of the vzv-igg titer occurred in >50% of the neonates. the predictive value of centers for disease control and prevention guidelines for identification of neonates who should receive vzig in case of exposure to vzv was poor: positive and negative predictive values were 0.80 and 0.43, respectively. the neonatal vzv-igg titer is predominantly predicted by the maternal vzv-igg titer, whereas birth weight and gestational age are much less predictive than previously reported.

to determine social factors associated with increased risk of hospital admission from diabetic ketoacidosis (dka) or diabetic coma as well as risk of prolonged hospital stay. a cohort of all children (=21 years) with type 1 diabetes mellitus (dm) in the national inpatient sample admitted for dka or diabetic coma during 1996 or 1997 was conducted. patients' age, race, gender, and insurance coverage were identified. length of stay and charges were examined; prolonged length of stay was defined as >/=7 days. a total of 8443 children with a primary hospital diagnosis of dka and 123 children with type 1 dm and coma were identified; 55% of the children were girls, 32% were nonwhite, 29% received medicaid insurance, and 33% resided in areas of poverty. children with prolonged hospital stay were significantly more likely to be of nonwhite race (odds ratio [or]: 2.0; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 1.6-2.5), to receive medicaid insurance (or: 1.4; 95% ci: 1.1-1.7), to live in areas of poverty (or: 1.3; 95% ci: 1.1-1.7), and to be of younger age. when compared with state census data, nonwhite and poor children were more likely to be admitted with complications of dm and to have significantly prolonged and expensive hospital stays. these children should be targeted for intensive diabetes education and outpatient medical support both to improve their health and potentially to decrease total health care costs.

the aim of this study was to ascertain the early developmental status of children who have a history of newborn encephalopathy. a longitudinal follow-up was conducted of a population-based, case-control study of children born in western australia between june 1993 and december 1996. the study included 276 term children (>/=37 weeks' gestation) with moderate or severe newborn encephalopathy and 564 unmatched term control subjects. the griffiths mental development scales was used to ascertain developmental status and a general quotient (gq) score. outcome measures were the griffiths developmental subscales, gq, diagnosis of cerebral palsy, and mortality. thirty-four patients and 1 control subject died before reaching assessment. between june 1994 and december 1999, 195 (81%) eligible patients and 445 (79%) eligible control subjects were assessed. statistically significant differences were found between patients and control subjects for gq and all developmental subscales. overall, 39% of patients had a poor outcome as defined by death, cerebral palsy, or a significant degree of developmental delay, compared with 2.7% of control subjects. furthermore, 62% of those with severe encephalopathy had a poor outcome compared with 25% of those with moderate encephalopathy. patients with a history of seizures were 3 times more likely to develop cerebral palsy than patients without. overall, 28 (10.1%) of patients have cerebral palsy. these data provide important prognostic information regarding survival and serious disability and indicate that newborn encephalopathy places children at significant risk of developmental delay by their second year. these findings also suggest that comprehensive clinical and educational assessments are required to enable appropriate educational provisions as these infants approach school entry.

with the recent dramatic decline in mortality rates of infants undergoing open-heart surgery (ohs), there is growing concern regarding neurodevelopmental sequelae. outcome studies have primarily focused on delineating developmental impairments; however, the impact on function and family burden has not been investigated. the objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of functional limitations and burden of care of young children with congenital heart defects (chd) after ohs. one hundred thirty-one eligible infants with chd undergoing their first ohs were recruited prospectively. patients were assessed pre- and postoperatively, and again 12 to 18 months after surgery. functional assessments included the weefim (functional independence measure) and the vineland adaptive behavior scale. for the weefim, mean quotients were 84.3 +/- 23.8 (self-care), 77.2 +/- 30.0 (mobility), and 92.4 +/- 27.8 (cognition), with an overall quotient of 83.8 +/- 23.4. only 21% of the cohort was functioning within their expected age range. moderate disability was noted in 37%, while only 6% demonstrated a severe disability. for the vineland scale, mean score for daily living skills was 84.4 +/- 17.6, and 80.3 +/- 15.9 for socialization. functional difficulties in daily living skills were documented in 40%, whereas >1/2 had poor socialization skills. factors enhancing risk for functional disabilities included perioperative neurodevelopmental status, microcephaly, length of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, length of stay in the intensive care unit, age at surgery, and maternal education. the high prevalence of functional limitations and dependence in activities of daily living is currently underappreciated in the clinical setting, and deserves additional attention by pediatricians and developmental specialists.

despite the rapid growth of centralized call centers to provide after-hours triage to patients of multiple providers, little is known about the perceptions of parents regarding this type of care and their compliance with triage disposition recommendations. from august through september 1999, randomized samples of after-hours calls were selected each day from computerized records at 4 pediatric call centers at 1) children's hospital, denver, colorado; 2) children's hospital of philadelphia, philadelphia, pennsylvania; 3) rainbow babies and children's hospital, cleveland, ohio; and 4) all children's hospital, st petersburg, florida. all participating call centers use the same triage software. calls were randomly selected to yield at least 250 callers with nonurgent dispositions and 100 with urgent dispositions from each site. telephone surveys to callers were conducted by an external survey unit 3 to 7 days after the call to the call center. surveys were completed for 70.5% of those sampled (n = 1561). parents indicated they were very satisfied or satisfied with aspects of care received from 92.6% (waiting time) to 99.4% (nurse courteousness) of the time. satisfaction did not differ by site or by recommended disposition of the index call. most parents (65.2%) reported no preference about speaking with a physician or nonphysician for after-hours care, whereas 27.7% preferred to speak with a physician. usually speaking with a physician during office hours (odds ratio [or]: 1.48), feeling it was important that provider knows child's medical history (or: 3.47), and respondent having an educational level of college graduate or higher (or: 1.30) were significant predictors of preferring to speak with a physician. of the 37.0% (n = 723) of parents who reported any change in their relationship with their primary provider as a result of the after-hours call center, 95.7% (n = 691) assessed the change to be positive. reported compliance with the call center disposition recommendation was 83.3% for urgent referral, 41.0% for next day, 4.5% for visit at a later time, and 78.2% for home care. the major reason given by parents for noncompliance was reporting that they heard a different disposition (76.9% for urgent to 100% for visit at a later time). parental satisfaction with pediatric call centers was uniformly high in 4 different geographic locations, and almost all parents who reported any effect on their relationship with their primary provider assessed it as positive. compliance with recommendations for urgent evaluation or home care was relatively high but for intermediary dispositions was low. in most cases in which noncompliance occurred, parents reported hearing a different disposition. additional study is needed to clarify whether noncompliance, especially in cases in which an urgent recommendations was made, is attributable to poor nurse communication of the recommended disposition, parental misinterpretation, or parental difference of opinion.

the increase in asthma prevalence has been documented worldwide, affecting many races living in many different climates. multiple studies have demonstrated that the most striking prevalence and morbidity of asthma in the united states has been in black children, but little research has determined the scale of the increase, or specifically when the disease became severe in this group. this study sought to determine exactly when the rise in asthma hospitalizations among black patients began and what the pattern of asthma hospitalizations has been in different races and age groups over a 40-year period in 1 urban area. a retrospective chart review of discharges from the medical university of south carolina was conducted from 1956 to 1997. charts with the primary discharge diagnosis of asthma were examined for discharge date, race, and age group (0- to 4-year-olds, 5- to 18-year-olds, 19- to 50-year-olds, > or =51-year-olds). the diagnostic codes used were based on the international classification of diseases (icd)-6, 1956-1957; icd-7, 1958-1967; icd-8, 1968-1978; and icd-9, 1979-1997. over the period studied, this hospital was the primary inpatient provider for children in this area, and the only provider for uninsured children. between 1960 and 1990, the racial makeup of the area remained stable, as did the percentage of blacks living at the poverty level. the raw number of asthma discharges, rate per 10 000 discharges of the same race, and rate per 100 000 population in charleston county were tabulated for each age group and racial category. over the time period examined, there has been a progressive increase in asthma hospitalizations in black individuals of all age groups and in whites under 18 years. the most striking increase has been in black children 0 to 18 years old (figure). the increase either as raw values or as a rate per 100 000 began around 1970, and was linear. this increase in black children discharged with asthma as a rate per 100 000 population was 20-fold: the rate increased from 18 in 1970 to 370 in 1997. asthma discharges as a rate per 10 000 black children discharged increased by 24-fold from 1960 to 1997. total discharges from the hospital increased from 49 000 to 128 000 per year over this period. blacks made up only 28% of discharges in 1957, but that proportion increased to 56% in 1960 and remained relatively stable over the following 35 years. the increase seen in white children 0 to 18 years of age as a rate per 100 000 population was 5-fold and began around 1980. both increases seem to be consistent over the time period studied, and continued to 1997. [figure: see text]. among a predominantly poor black population living in a southern us city, there has been a steady increase in childhood asthma hospitalizations over the past 30 years. a significant although less dramatic rise has occurred in white children. over this time period, although there have been many changes in lifestyle that could have contributed to this rise, there have been no major changes in housing conditions for poor patients. in addition, medicaid coverage for children in south carolina did not change significantly until 1999. the time course of these increases parallels increases reported in other western populations, suggesting that there must be 1 or more common factors contributing to the rise. many explanations have been offered for the changes in incidence and severity of asthma. the scale of the change, time course, and linearity of the increase in this study represent a challenge to many of the hypotheses proposed to explain this epidemic.

between 1989 and 1995, expansions in medicaid eligibility provided publicly financed health insurance to an additional 7 million poor and near-poor children. it is not known whether these expansions affected children's insurance coverage, use of health care services, or health status differently, depending on their race/ethnicity. the objective of this study was to examine, by race/ethnicity, the impact of the recent medicaid expansions on levels of uninsured individuals, health care service utilization, and health status of the targeted groups of children. using a stratified set of longitudinal data from the national health interview surveys of 1989 and 1995, we compared changes in measures of health insurance coverage, health services utilization, and health status for poor white, black, and hispanic 1- to 12-year-old children. to control for underlying trends over time, we subtracted 1989 to 1995 changes in these outcomes among nonpoor children from changes among the poor children for each race/ethnicity group. measures of coverage included uninsured rates and medicaid rates. utilization measures included annual probability of visiting a doctor, annual number of doctor visits, and annual probability of hospitalization. health status measures included self-reported health status and number of restricted-activity days in the 2 weeks before the interview. differences in means were analyzed with the use of student's t tests accounting for the clustering sample design of the national health interview surveys. among poor children between 1989 and 1995, uninsured rates declined by 4 percentage points for whites, 11 percentage points for blacks, and 19 percentage points for hispanics. medicaid rates for these groups increased by 16 percentage points, 22 percentage points, and 23 percentage points, respectively. with respect to utilization, the annual probability of seeing a physician increased 7 percentage points among poor blacks and hispanics but only 1 percentage point among poor whites (not significant) for children in good, fair, or poor health. among those in excellent or very good health, the respective increases were 1 percentage point for poor whites (not significant), 7 percentage points for poor blacks, and 3 percentage points for poor hispanics (not significant). significant increases in numbers of doctor visits per year were recorded only for poor hispanics who were in excellent or very good health, whereas significant decreases in hospitalizations were recorded for hispanics who were in good fair or poor health. measures of health status remained unchanged for poor children over time. the recorded decreases in uninsured rates and increases in medicaid coverage remained robust to adjustments for underlying trends for all 3 race/ethnicity groups. with respect to adjusted measures of utilization and health status, the only significant differences found were among poor blacks who were in good, fair, or poor health and who registered increases in the likelihood of hospitalization and in poor hispanics who were in excellent or very good health and who registered decreases in the numbers of restricted-activity days. recent expansions in the medicaid program from 1989 to 1995 produced greater reductions in uninsured rates among poor minority children than among poor white children. regardless of race/ethnicity, poor children did not seem to experience significant changes during the period of the expansions in either their level of health service utilization or their health status.medicaid, health insurance, health status, health services.

to assess the impact of varying definitions of excessive crying and infantile colic on prevalence estimates and to assess to what extent these definitions comprise the same children. parents of 3345 infants aged 1, 3, and 6 months (response: 96.5%) were interviewed on the crying behavior of their infant in a dutch cross-sectional national population-based study. we computed the prevalence of excessive crying according to 10 published definitions regarding parent-reported duration of infant crying and the parents' experience. we measured concordance between pairs of definitions by cohen's kappa (agreement adjusted for chance agreement). overall prevalence rates of excessive crying varied strongly between definitions, from 1.5% to 11.9%. they were always highest in 1-month-old infants. concordance between definitions was only excellent (kappa > 0.75) if they were closely related, such as crying for >3 hours/day for >3 days/week for the preceding 2 or 3 weeks. concordance between less closely related definitions was much weaker. concordance between definitions that were based on duration and on parental experience was mostly poor (kappa: 0.17-0.53 for infants aged 1 and 3 months). different definitions of excessive crying lead to the inclusion of very dissimilar groups of infants. we recommend presenting study results using clearly described definitions, preferably concerning both duration of crying and parental distress. this may improve the comparability of studies on the cause and treatment of excessive infant crying. the impact of the method of data collection on this comparability needs additional study.colic, preventive child health care, prevention, infancy.

to evaluate and analyze the existing evidence for the diagnosis and treatment of acute uncomplicated sinusitis in children. a systematic overview and meta-analysis considered all pertinent studies with at least 10 children younger than 18 years with acute symptoms of <30 days and without serious complications. clinical improvement rates for intervention studies of antibiotics or ancillary measures; concordance of diagnostic tests (expressed as likelihood ratios). of 1857 citations originally reviewed, we identified 21 qualifying studies, compared with 450 reports on complications of acute sinusitis and 233 nonsystematic reviews of the subject. the qualifying studies included 5 randomized, controlled trials and 8 case series on antibiotic therapy, 3 randomized, controlled trials on ancillary treatments, and 8 studies with information on diagnostic tests (including 3 therapeutic trials). definitions and inclusion criteria were heterogeneous across studies. the pooled clinical improvement rate with antibiotics was 88% (177/202) in randomized, controlled trials and 92% (318/345) in nonrandomized studies; the improvement rates on no antibiotics were 60% and 80%, respectively. improvement rates were significantly higher in nonrandomized studies (mantel-haenszel odds ratio: 1.79; 95% ci: 1.05-3.04, stratified for use of antibiotics). data on ancillary measures were sparse and heterogeneous. in studies comparing clinical findings with plain film radiography, the pooled rate of abnormal radiographic findings against a clinical diagnosis of sinusitis was 73% (596/814; range: 55% to 96% between studies). there was poor concordance between clinical criteria, plain radiographs, ultrasonography, computed tomography, and fluid on aspiration in all available paired assessments (all positive likelihood ratios were =4 and all negative likelihood ratios were >/=0.2). good, high-quality evidence for acute uncomplicated sinusitis in children is limited. diagnostic modalities show poor concordance, and treatment options are based on inadequate data. more evidence is needed for defining the optimal treatment and diagnostic methods for this common condition.

to test the hypothesis that early postnatal dexamethasone will reduce the incidence of death or chronic lung disease (cld) in ventilated extremely low birth weight premature infants. multicenter randomized double-blinded controlled clinical trial. a total of 42 neonatal intensive care units in the vermont oxford network. infants weighing 501 to 1000 g were eligible for enrollment at 12 hours of age if they needed assisted ventilation, had received surfactant replacement therapy, were physiologically stable, had no obvious life-threatening congenital anomaly, and had blood cultures obtained and antibiotic therapy initiated. infants were randomly assigned to dexamethasone or saline placebo. intravenous dexamethasone was administered for 12 days according to the following dosing schedule: 0.5 mg/kg/d for 3 days, 0.25 mg/kg/d for 3 days, 0.10 mg/kg/d for 3 days, 0.05 mg/kg/d for 3 days. infants in either group could receive treatment with selective late postnatal steroids beginning on day 14 of life if they were on assisted ventilation with supplemental oxygen greater than 30%. the primary outcome measure was cld or death at 36 weeks postmenstrual age. the study was stopped before completion of sample size goals because of concern about serious side effects in the early steroid treatment group. a total of 542 infants were enrolled (early treatment n = 273, control n = 269). the 2 groups had similar demographic characteristics. no differences were noted in the primary outcome of cld or death at 36 weeks postmenstrual age (early treatment 50% vs control: 53%, relative risk: 0.93; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 0.79-1.09). fewer infants who received early steroid treatment had a patent ductus arteriosus (relative risk: 0.78; 95% ci: 0.63-0.96), and fewer infants in the early steroid group received indomethacin therapy (relative risk: 0.74; 95% ci: 0.64-0.86) or late steroid treatment (relative risk: 0.69; 95% ci: 0.58-0.81). however, more infants who received early steroid treatment had complications associated with therapy including an increase in hyperglycemia (relative risk: 1.29; 95% ci: 1.13-1.46) and an increase in the use of insulin therapy (relative risk: 1.62; 95% ci: 1.36-1.94). a trend toward increased gastrointestinal hemorrhage (relative risk: 1.55; 95% ci: 0.92-2.61), gastrointestinal perforation (relative risk: 1.53; 95% ci: 0.89-2.61), and an increased systolic blood pressure (relative risk: 1.34; 95% ci: 0.97-1.85) was noted. in infants receiving cranial ultrasound examinations, a marginal increase in periventricular leukomalacia was noted in the early steroid treatment group (relative risk: 2.23; 95% ci: 0.99-5.04). infants who received early steroid therapy had fewer days in supplemental oxygen but experienced poor weight gain. a 12-day course of early postnatal steroid therapy given to extremely low birth weight infants did not decrease the risk of cld or death at 36 weeks postmenstrual age and was associated with an increased risk of complications and poor weight gain.

breastfeeding initiation rates were compared at boston medical center before (1995), during (1998), and after (1999) baby-friendly policies were in place. boston medical center, an inner-city teaching hospital that provides care primarily to poor, minority, and immigrant families, achieved baby-friendly status in 1999. two hundred complete medical records, randomly selected by a computer, were reviewed from each of 3 years: 1995, 1998, and 1999. infants were excluded for medical records missing feeding data, human immunodeficiency virus-positive parent, neonatal intensive care unit admission, maternal substance abuse, adoption, incarceration, or hepatitis c-positive mother. all infant feedings during the hospital postpartum stay were tallied, and each infant was categorized into 1 of 4 groups: exclusive breast milk, mostly breast milk, mostly formula, and exclusive formula. maternal and infant demographics for all 3 years were comparable. the breastfeeding initiation rate increased from 58% (1995) to 77.5% (1998) to 86.5% (1999). infants exclusively breastfed increased from 5.5% (1995) to 28.5% (1998) to 33.5% (1999). initiation rates increased among us-born black mothers in this population from 34% (1995) to 64% (1998) to 74% (1999). full implementation of the ten steps to successful breastfeeding leading to baby-friendly designation is an effective strategy to increase breastfeeding initiation rates in the us hospital setting.

adherence to treatment of iron-deficiency anemia often is poor in both developed and developing countries. the current standard therapy is ferrous sulfate drops (or syrup) administered 3 times daily. it is possible that adherence would improve with a single-dose daily treatment regimen. we compared the use of single versus 3-times-daily ferrous sulfate drops, at the same total iron dose, on treatment of anemia in infants. to obtain a large enough cohort of anemic subjects, we performed the study in rural ghana. using a prospective, randomized, controlled design, we studied 557 anemic children (age range: 6-24 months; hemoglobin values: 70-99 g/l). one group (n = 280) received ferrous sulfate drops once daily (40 mg elemental iron), and the control group (n = 277) received ferrous sulfate drops 3 times per day (total dose, 40 mg elemental iron). treatment lasted for 2 months. hemoglobin and serum ferritin values were measured at baseline and at the end of the study. successful treatment of anemia (hemoglobin >100 g/l) occurred in 61% of the single-dose and in 56% of the 3-times-daily group. geometric mean ferritin levels increased significantly in each group from baseline to the final visit. side effects were minimal and similar between the 2 groups. a single versus a 3-times-daily dose of ferrous sulfate drops over 2 months resulted in a similar rate of successful treatment of anemia, without side effects. to our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of the use of a single-dose daily regimen to treat anemia. although not examined in the current study, use of a single-dose daily regimen may improve adherence to treatment of anemia in infants.

to describe fully pneumatosis intestinalis (pi) in non-neonatal pediatric patients and to characterize those patients with higher risk of poor outcome, including need for surgery and death. a retrospective chart review was conducted of all patients 30 days of age and older with pi in a tertiary care children's hospital during an 8-year period. underlying medical condition, presenting signs and symptoms, radiologic grade of pneumatosis, and events that immediately preceded the onset of pi were reviewed, and their correlation with outcome was assessed. thirty-seven episodes of pi occurred in 32 patients. seventy-eight percent of patients were male, and the median age was 29 months. major patient diagnostic groups identified with pi included healthy children (22%), patients with organ and bone marrow transplant (22%), patients with decompensated congenital heart disease (12.5%), motility disorders (12.5%), gastroschisis (9%), and short bowel syndrome (6%). the most common events that immediately preceded the onset of pi were noninfectious colitis (32%), acute enteric infection or toxin (27%), bowel ischemia (20%), and gastrointestinal dysmotility (17%). resolution of pi with medical management occurred in 78% of episodes (good outcome). twenty-two percent of episodes resulted in a poor outcome: patient death (8%) or surgery (14%). the presence of portal venous gas and low mean serum bicarbonate concentration were the only clinical factors that correlated significantly with poor outcome. only 25% of patients with pneumoperitoneum required surgery. poor outcome was seen most commonly in 2 patient diagnostic groups: transplant patients (43% of patients) and decompensated cardiac disease (50% of patients). the event that preceded pi also had an impact on outcome. pi preceded by ischemia or graft versus host disease colitis was associated with poor outcome in 50% and 75% of cases, respectively. pi is a radiologic sign that occurs in a variety of settings in non-neonates. pi preceded by bowel ischemia or graft versus host disease colitis has the worst prognosis, and the presence of portal venous gas and acidosis correlate with poor outcome. not all patients with pneumoperitoneum require surgical intervention. overall, outcome of pi in non-neonatal patients was better than that reported in neonates with necrotizing enterocolitis.pneumatosis intestinalis, necrotizing enterocolitis, non-neonatal.

masks are an essential interface between valved holding chambers (vhcs), or spacers, and a small child's face for providing aerosol therapy. clinical experience suggests that many young children do not cooperate with the vhc treatment or tolerate a mask of any kind. this might impair the mask-face seal and reduce the dose delivered to the child. the objective of this study was to evaluate the ability of parents to provide a good mask-face seal in infants and toddlers using 3 masks provided with commonly used pediatric vhcs and compare this with the seal obtained with the hans rudolph pediatric anesthesia mask. a preliminary in vitro filter study was conducted to validate the assumption that reduced ventilation as a result of increased facemask leak reduces the drug aerosol dose delivered to the mouth. facemask leak then was studied in vivo for nebuchamber, aerochamber, babyhaler, and hans rudolph masks by measuring ventilation with an in-line pneumotachograph while the facemask was held in place by experienced parents who were asked to demonstrate how they deliver medication to their children without any additional instruction. thirty children (mean age: 3.2 +/- 1.4 years) performed 4 repeat studies with each mask. the first 10 patients performed the tests once again within 1 month. on the second occasion, the parents were coached continuously and encouraged to hold the mask tightly against the child's face. the aerochamber and hans rudolph masks provided the best seal as reflected in the magnitude of the ventilation measured through them. the nebuchamber provided the poorest seal, with 45% less ventilation than the aerochamber and hans rudolph masks. there was considerable intraindividual variability for all masks (24% to 48%); however, the variability with the nebuchamber mask was 2-fold greater than the other masks. all ventilatory volumes during the coached session were significantly greater than during the uncoached session. variability during the coached session was significantly less (except for the babyhaler, which remained unchanged). vhcs with masks designed for use with small children may provide a poor seal with the face, leading to reduced or more variable dose delivery. the facemask seal is critical for efficient aerosol delivery to infants and young children, and this should be stressed to parents.

very long chain fatty acid dehydrogenase (vlcad) deficiency is a rare but treatable cause of cardiomyopathy, fatty liver, skeletal myopathy, pericardial effusions, ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death. unrecognized, vlcad deficiency may be rapidly progressive and fatal, secondary to its cardiac involvement. because early diagnosis improves outcome, we present a neonate with vlcad deficiency in whom retrospective analysis of the newborn screening card revealed that a correct diagnosis could have been made by newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry. our patient demonstrated a classic neonatal course with transient hypoglycemia at birth, interpreted as culture-negative sepsis, followed by a quiescent period notable only for hypotonia and poor feeding. at 3 months, he presented with cardiorespiratory failure and pericardial effusions, requiring pericardiocentesis, tracheostomy, and prolonged mechanical ventilation. plasma free-fatty acid and acylcarnitine profiles demonstrated small but significant elevations of c14:2, c14:1, c16, and c18:1 acylcarnitine species, findings consistent with a biochemical diagnosis of vlcad deficiency. enteral feeds were changed to portagen formula with marked improvement in cardiac symptoms over several weeks. to confirm the biochemical diagnosis, molecular analysis was performed by analysis of genomic dna on a blood sample of the patient. sequencing analysis and delineation of vlcad mutations were performed using polymerase chain reaction and genomic sequencing. the patient was heterozygous for 2 different disease-causing mutations at the vlcad locus. the maternal mutation was a deletion of bp 842-3 in exon 8, causing a shift in the reading frame. the paternal mutation was g+1a in the consensus donor splice site after exon 1; this splice-site mutation would likely result in decreased mrna. the likely consequence of these mutations is essentially a null phenotype. to determine whether this case could have been picked up by tandem mass spectrometry analysis at birth when the patient was asymptomatic, acylcarnitine analysis was performed on the patient's original newborn card (after obtaining parental consent, the original specimen was provided courtesy of dr kenneth pass, director, new york state newborn screening program). the blood sample had been obtained at 1 week of age and stored at room temperature for 6 months and at 70 degrees c thereafter for 18 months. electrospray tandem mass spectrometry used a lc-ms/ms api 2000 operated in ion evaporation mode with the turboionspray ionization probe source. the acylcarnitine profile obtained from the patient's original newborn card was analyzed 2 years after it was obtained. in comparison with a normal control, there was a significant accumulation of long chain acylcarnitine species, with a prominent peak of tetradecenoylcarnitine (c14:1), the most characteristic metabolic marker of vlcad deficiency. this profile would have likely been even more significant if it had been analyzed at the time of collection, yet 2 years later is sufficient to provide strong biochemical evidence of the underlying disorder. discussion. vlcad was first discovered in 1992, and clinical experience with vlcad deficiency has been accumulating rapidly. indeed, the patients originally diagnosed with long chain acyl-coa deficiency suffer instead from vlcad deficiency. the phenotype of vlcad deficiency is heterogeneous, ranging from catastrophic metabolic and cardiac failure in infancy to mild hypoketotic, hypoglycemia, and exertional rhabdomyolysis in adults. this case demonstrates that vlcad deficiency could have been detected from the patient's own neonatal heel-stick sample. most likely, a presymptomatic diagnosis would have avoided at least part of a lengthy and intensive prediagnosis hospitalization that had an estimated cost of $400 000. although vlcad is relatively rare, timely and correct diagnosis leads to dramatic recovery, so that detection by newborn screening could prevent the onset of arrhythmias, heart failure, metabolic insufficiency, and death. fatty acid oxidation defects, including vlcad deficiency, may account for as many as 5% of sudden infant death patients. recent instrumentation advances have made automated tandem mass spectrometry of routine neonatal heel-stick samples technically feasible. pilot studies have demonstrated an incidence of fatty acid oxidation defects, including short chain, medium chain, and very long chain acyl-coa dehydrogenase deficiencies, of approximately 1/12 000. as a result, cost-benefit ratios for this approach should be systematically examined.

to characterize a rare inherited hypokalemic salt-losing tubulopathy with linkage to chromosome 1p31. we conducted a retrospective analysis of the clinical data for 7 patients in whom cosegregation of the disease with chromosome 1p31 had been demonstrated. in addition, in 1 kindred, prenatal diagnosis in the second child was established, allowing a prospective clinical evaluation. clinical presentation of the patients was homogeneous and included premature birth attributable to polyhydramnios, severe renal salt loss, normotensive hyperreninemia, hypokalemic alkalosis, and excessive hyperprostaglandin e-uria, which suggested the diagnosis of hyperprostaglandin e syndrome/antenatal bartter syndrome. however, the response to indomethacin was only poor, accounting for a more severe variant of the disease. the patients invariably developed chronic renal failure. the majority had extreme growth retardation, and motor development was markedly delayed. in addition, all patients turned out to be deaf. the hypokalemic salt-losing tubulopathy with chronic renal failure and sensorineural deafness represents not only genetically but also clinically a disease entity distinct from hyperprostaglandin e syndrome/antenatal bartter syndrome. a pleiotropic effect of a single gene defect is most likely causative for syndromic hearing loss.

because research has not confirmed a relationship between compliance with health supervision in infancy and improved health outcomes, we examined the association between adherence to prevailing guidelines for periodic health supervision and adverse health outcome indicated by incidence of avoidable hospitalizations. this was a historic cohort study of 308 131 children enrolled in medicaid at birth in california, georgia, and michigan in 1990 using medicaid records linked across 3 years. we used avoidable hospitalizations as indicators of health in a survival analysis. the analysis used variables that represented completeness and timeliness of well-child visits and immunizations using aap guidelines for health supervision as the gold standard. when the children in this cohort were up-to-date for age on their schedule of well-child visits, they were less likely to have an avoidable hospitalization (race, illness, and level of poverty adjusted hazard ratios 0.52 [95% confidence interval (ci): 0.50-0.55] in california, 0.54 [95% ci: 0.50-0.55] in georgia, and 0.7 [95% ci: 0.69-0.79] in michigan). among children who were not up-to-date with well-child visits, a sporadic preventive care visit conferred a mild benefit. immunizations and race/ethnicity had no consistent relationship with incidence of avoidable hospitalizations. a series of well-child visits maintained during the first 2 years of life has a positive effect on health outcomes as indicated by a decrease in avoidable hospitalizations among poor and near-poor children, regardless of race, level of poverty, or health status. national efforts to improve the quality of child health services for young children should focus on increasing compliance with periodic preventive care for young children in addition to improving immunization levels.

to determine whether synchronized nasal intermittent positive pressure ventilation (snippv) would decrease extubation failure compared with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (ncpap) in preterm infants being ventilated for respiratory distress syndrome (rds). infants who were =34 weeks' gestational age and who were ventilated for rds were randomized to either snippv or ncpap after extubation. the criteria for extubation were peak inspiratory pressure of =16 cm h(2)o, positive end expiratory pressure of =5 cm h(2)o, intermittent mandatory ventilation rate of 15 to 25, and fraction of inspired oxygen =0.35. pulmonary function tests (pft) were obtained before extubation. after extubation, blood gases were monitored for a minimum of 72 hours. success was defined as remaining in the selected mode of treatment or demonstrating improvement (switching to oxyhood/nasal cannula/room air) by 72 hours. thirty-two (94%) of 34 infants were extubated successfully with the use of snippv versus 18 (60%) of 30 with the use of ncpap (p /=0.5 ml/kg/cm h(2)o and expiratory airway resistance of =70 cm h(2)o/l/s were extubated successfully. in infants with poor lung function (dynamic lung compliance: <0.5 ml/kg/cm h(2)o; expiratory airway resistance: >70 cm h(2)o/l/s), successful extubation was seen in 93% (27 of 29) in the snippv group and 60% (15 of 25) in the ncpap group. when weight was controlled for at the time of extubation, the odds of success in the snippv group were 21.1 times higher (95% confidence interval: 3.4, 130.1) than that of the ncpap group. snippv is more effective than ncpap in weaning infants with rds from the ventilator. pft may be useful in predicting successful extubation.

to compare the availability of timely orthopedic care to a child with a fractured arm insured by medi-cal (california state medicaid) and by private insurance. fifty randomly chosen offices of orthopedic surgeons were telephoned with the following scenario: "my 10-year-old son broke his arm last week during a vacation" followed by a request for an appointment that week. each office was called twice with an identical script except for insurance status: once with medi-cal and once with private insurance. all 50 offices offered an appointment to see the child with private insurance within 7 days. only 1 of the same 50 offices offered an appointment to see the child with medi-cal within 7 days. of the offices that would not see a child with medi-cal, 87% were unable to recommend an orthopedic office that accepted medi-cal. timely access to orthopedic care was available in 100% of offices polled to a child with private insurance versus in 2% of offices to a child with medi-cal. this is a significant difference. lack of timely orthopedic care may result in poor outcome, ie, if a fracture is not properly aligned in the first few weeks, a permanent deformity may result. although causation cannot be established from this study, we suspect that medi-cal reimbursement rates below the cost of office overhead may be of significance. although federal guidelines require that payments must be sufficient to enlist enough providers so that services to medi-cal recipients are available to the same extent as those available to the general population, this study finds that that children with medi-cal insurance have significantly less access to timely orthopedic care.

the aim of this study was to evaluate the occurrence of prothrombotic disorders in a well-characterized cohort of infants with neonatal stroke and to document any association of prothrombotic disorders with the type of infarct seen on magnetic resonance imaging (mri) and clinical outcome. twenty-four infants with perinatal cerebral infarction confirmed by neonatal mri were enrolled in the study. all the infants and, when possible, both parents were tested to identify inherited and acquired prothrombotic disorders. none of the infants had a significant bleeding diathesis, but 10 (42%) had at least 1 prothrombotic risk factor. five children showed heterozygosity for factor v leiden, and 6 had high factor viiic concentrations. there was a striking association between the occurrence of these abnormalities and both the presence of cerebral hemorrhage on mri and poor neurologic outcome. eight of the 11 patients (73%) with hemiplegia or global developmental delay had factor v leiden and/or raised factor viiic, whereas only 1 of the 13 patients (8%) with normal outcome had any prothrombotic risk factors. in particular, all 5 infants with factor v leiden had hemiplegia, compared with only 4 of the 19 infants without factor v leiden (21%). these data suggest that the presence of prothrombotic risk factors and, in particular, of the factor v leiden mutation, is significantly associated with poor outcome after perinatal cerebral infarction.

the short-term course of pediatric patients after emergency department (ed) treatment for acute asthma has not been comprehensively documented; most previous studies have limited outcomes to ed length-of-stay, hospital admission, and relapse. to describe symptom persistence, medication use, functional disability, follow-up, and relapse in these children in the 2 weeks after acute treatment and ed discharge. randomly selected, prospective cohort from september 1996 to august 1997; follow-up telephone interviews at 1 and 2 weeks. setting. a large, inner-city children's hospital emergency department. patients. random sample of pediatric asthma visits requiring ed treatment but not admission; 457 were eligible, 388 with complete follow-up (85%); final sample included 367 patients after multiple visits deleted. details of symptom persistence, functional disability, medication use, relapse, and routine follow-up. results included significant morbidity: 23% (95% confidence interval [ci]: 19, 27) with cough and 12% (95% ci: 9, 15) with wheeze persistent at 2 weeks; 20% (95% ci: 16, 24) with decreased activity at 1 week; 45% (95% ci: 39, 51) missed >2 and 24% (95% ci: 19, 29) >/=5 days of school or day care; 17% (95% ci: 13, 21) spent >/=3 days in bed; 54% (95% ci: 47, 60) of caretakers missed at least 1 and 18% (95% ci: 13, 24) missed >2 days of school or work; and 32% (95% ci: 28, 38) of patients were still using greater than baseline medication at 2 weeks. reported relapse rates were averaged at 13% (95% ci: 10, 17) with 3% (95% ci: 1, 5) admitted. routine office follow-up was poor: 29% (95% ci: 25, 34) had had a visit; 48% (95% ci: 43, 54) reported no visit/none planned. a considerable proportion of inner-city pediatric patients discharged from the hospital from the ed after standard treatment for acute asthma had poor short-term outcomes. conventional markers of successful ed treatment, such as avoiding hospital admission or relapse, do not adequately describe outcomes of acute care. the patient-oriented measures described here may provide more useful indicators of outcome in the evaluation of acute asthma care.

it is widely appreciated that health food beverages are not appropriate for infants. because of continued growth, children beyond infancy remain susceptible to nutritional disorders. we report on 2 cases of severe nutritional deficiency caused by consumption of health food beverages. in both cases, the parents were well-educated, appeared conscientious, and their children received regular medical care. diagnoses were delayed by a low index of suspicion. in addition, nutritional deficiencies are uncommon in the united states and as a result, us physicians may be unfamiliar with their clinical features. case 1, a 22-month-old male child, was admitted with severe kwashiorkor. he was breastfed until 13 months of age. because of a history of chronic eczema and perceived milk intolerance, he was started on a rice beverage after weaning. on average, he consumed 1.5 l of this drink daily. intake of solid foods was very poor. as this rice beverage, which was fallaciously referred to as rice milk, is extremely low in protein content, the resulting daily protein intake of 0.3 g/kg/day was only 25% of the recommended dietary allowance. in contrast, caloric intake was 72% of the recommended energy intake, so the dietary protein to energy ratio was very low. a photograph of the patient after admission illustrates the typical features of kwashiorkor: generalized edema, hyperpigmented and hypopigmented skin lesions, abdominal distention, irritability, and thin, sparse hair. because of fluid retention, the weight was on the 10th percentile and he had a rotund sugar baby appearance. laboratory evaluation was remarkable for a serum albumin of 1.0 g/dl (10 g/l), urea nitrogen <0.5 mg/dl (<0.2 mmol/l), and a normocytic anemia with marked anisocytosis. evaluation for other causes of hypoalbuminemia was negative. therapy for kwashiorkor was instituted, including gradual refeeding, initially via a nasogastric tube because of severe anorexia. supplements of potassium, phosphorus, multivitamins, zinc, and folic acid were provided. the patient responded dramatically to refeeding with a rising serum albumin and total resolution of the edema within 3 weeks. at follow-up 1 year later he continued to do well on a regular diet supplemented with a milk-based pediatric nutritional supplement. the mortality of kwashiorkor remains high, because of complications such as infection (kwashiorkor impairs cellular immune defenses) and electrolyte imbalances with ongoing diarrhea. children in industrialized countries have developed kwashiorkor resulting from the use of a nondairy creamer as a milk alternative, but we were unable to find previous reports of kwashiorkor caused by a health food milk alternative. we suspect that cases have been overlooked. case 2, a 17-month-old black male, was diagnosed with rickets. he was full-term at birth and was breastfed until 10 months of age, when he was weaned to a soy health food beverage, which was not fortified with vitamin d or calcium. intake of solid foods was good, but included no animal products. total daily caloric intake was 114% of the recommended dietary allowance. dietary vitamin d intake was essentially absent because of the lack of vitamin d-fortified milk. the patient lived in a sunny, warm climate, but because of parental career demands, he had limited sun exposure. his dark complexion further reduced ultraviolet light-induced endogenous skin synthesis of vitamin d. the patient grew and developed normally until after his 9-month check-up, when he had an almost complete growth arrest of both height and weight. the parents reported regression in gross motor milestones. on admission the patient was unable to crawl or roll over. he could maintain a sitting position precariously when so placed. conversely, his language, fine motor-adaptive, and personal-social skills were well-preserved. generalized hypotonia, weakness, and decreased muscle bulk were present. clinical features of rickets present on examination included: frontal bossing, an obvious rachitic rosary (photographed), genu varus, flaring of the wrists, and lumbar kyphoscoliosis. the serum alkaline phosphatase was markedly elevated (1879 u/l), phosphorus was low (1.7 mg/dl), and calcium was low normal (8.9 mg/dl). the 25-hydroxy-vitamin d level was low (7.7 pg/ml) and the parathyroid hormone level was markedly elevated (114 pg/ml). the published radiographs are diagnostic of advanced rickets, showing diffuse osteopenia, frayed metaphyses, widened epiphyseal plates, and a pathologic fracture of the ulna. the patient was treated with ergocalciferol and calcium supplements. the published growth chart demonstrates the dramatic response to therapy. gross motor milestones were fully regained within 6 months. the prominent neuromuscular manifestations shown by this patient serve as a reminder that rickets should be considered in the differential diagnosis of motor delay. (abstract truncated)

1) to determine the extent of short stature in patients with fanconi anemia (fa); 2) to determine the extent and nature of endocrinopathy in fa; 3) to assess the impact on height of any endocrinopathies in these patients; and 4) to study the correlation, if any, between height, endocrinopathy, and fa complementation group. fifty-four patients with fa, 30 males and 24 females from 47 unrelated families, were prospectively evaluated in a pediatric clinical research center. the patients ranged in age from 0.1-31.9 years, with the mean age at assessment 8.6 years. endocrine abnormalities were found in 44 of the 54 fa patients tested (81%), including short stature, growth hormone (gh) insufficiency, hypothyroidism, glucose intolerance, hyperinsulinism, and/or overt diabetes mellitus. twenty-one of 48 (44%) participants had a subnormal response to gh stimulation; 19 of 53 (36%) had overt or compensated hypothyroidism, while 8 of 40 participants had reduced thyroid-hormone binding. two patients were diabetic at the time of study; impaired glucose tolerance was found in 8 of 40 patients (25%), but most surprisingly, hyperinsulinemia was present in 28 of 39 (72%) participants tested. significantly, spontaneous overnight gh secretion was abnormal in all patients tested (n = 13). in addition, participants demonstrated a tendency toward primary hypothyroidism with serum tetraiodothyronine levels at the lower range of normal, while also having thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone) levels at the high end of normal. sixteen patients were assigned to fa complementation group a, (fa-a), 12 to fa-c, and 5 to fa-g; 10 of the 12 participants in fa-c were homozygous for a mutation in the intron-4 donor splice site of the fancc gene. patients in groups fa-a and fa-g were relatively taller than the group as a whole (but still below the mean for the general population), whereas those in fa-c had a significantly reduced height for age. gh response to stimulation testing was most consistently normal in participants from fa-g, but this did not reach statistical significance. the tendency toward hypothyroidism was more pronounced in participants belonging to complementation groups fa-c and fa-g, whereas insulin resistance was most evident in patients in fa-g, and least evident in those in fa-c. short stature was a very common finding among the patients with a mean height >2 standard deviations below the reference mean (standard deviation score: -2.35 +/- 0.28). patients with subnormal gh response and those with overt or compensated hypothyroidism were shorter than the group with no endocrinopathies. the heights of those participants with glucose or insulin abnormalities were less severely affected than those of normoglycemic, normoinsulinemic participants, although all were significantly below the normal mean. the mean height standard deviation score of patients with entirely normal endocrine function was also >2 standard deviations below the normal mean, demonstrating that short stature is an inherent feature of fa. endocrinopathies are a common feature of fa, primarily manifesting as glucose/insulin abnormalities, gh insufficiency, and hypothyroidism. although short stature is a well-recognized feature of fa, 23 patients (43%) were within 2 standard deviations, and 5 of these (9% of the total) were actually above the mean for height for the general population. those patients with endocrine dysfunction are more likely to have short stature. these data indicate that short stature is an integral feature of fa, but that superimposed endocrinopathies further impact on growth. the demonstration of abnormal endogenous gh secretion may demonstrate an underlying hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction that results in poor growth.

this statement describes the possible negative health effects of television viewing on children and adolescents, such as violent or aggressive behavior, substance use, sexual activity, obesity, poor body image, and decreased school performance. in addition to the television ratings system and the v-chip (electronic device to block programming), media education is an effective approach to mitigating these potential problems. the american academy of pediatrics offers a list of recommendations on this issue for pediatricians and for parents, the federal government, and the entertainment industry.

the aims of this prospective nationwide investigation were to establish the birth rate, mortality, and morbidity of extremely low birth weight (elbw) infants in finland in 1996-1997, and to analyze risk factors associated with poor outcome. the study population included all stillborn and live-born elbw infants (birth weight: <1000 g; gestational age: at least 22 gestational weeks [gws]), born in finland between january 1, 1996 and december 31, 1997. surviving infants were followed until discharge or to the age corresponding with 40 gws. national elbw infant register data with 101 prenatal and postnatal variables were used to calculate the mortality and morbidity rates. a total of 32 variables were included in risk factor analysis. the risk factors for death and intraventricular hemorrhage (ivh) of the live-born infants as well as for retinopathy of prematurity (rop) and oxygen dependency of the surviving infants were analyzed using logistic regression models. a total of 529 elbw infants (.4% of all newborn infants) were born during the 2-year study. the perinatal mortality of elbw infants was 55% and accounted for 39% of all perinatal deaths. of all elbw infants, 34% were stillborn, 21% died on days 0 through 6, and 3% on days 7 though 28. neonatal mortality was 38% and postneonatal mortality was 2%. of the infants who were alive at the age of 4 days, 88% survived. in infants surviving >12 hours, the overall incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (rds) was 76%; of blood culture-positive septicemia, 22%; of ivh grades ii through iv, 20%; and of necrotizing enterocolitis (nec) with bowel perforation, 9%. the rate of ivh grades ii through iv and nec with bowel perforation decreased with increasing gestational age, but the incidence of rds did not differ significantly between gws 24 to 29. a total of 5 infants (2%) needed a shunt operation because of posthemorrhagic ventricular dilatation. two hundred eleven elbw infants (40% of all and 60% of live-born infants) survived until discharge or to the age corresponding with 40 gws. the oxygen dependency rate at the age corresponding to 36 gws was 39%, and 9% had rop stage iii-v. neurological status was considered completely normal in 74% of the surviving infants. the proportions of infants born at 22 to 23, 24 to 25, 26 to 27, and 28 to 29 gws with at least one disability (rop, oxygen dependency, or abnormal neurological status) at the age corresponding to 36 gws were 100%, 62%, 51%, and 45%, respectively. birth weight <600 g and gestational age <25 gws were the independent risks for death and short-term disability. the primary risk factor for ivh grades ii through iv was rds. low 5-minute apgar scores predicted poor prognosis, ie, death or ivh, and antenatal steroid treatment to mothers with threatening premature labor seemed to protect infants against these. some differences were found in the mortality rates between the 5 university hospital districts: neonatal mortality was significantly lower (25% vs 44%) in one university hospital area and notably higher (53% vs 34%) in another area. furthermore, significant differences were also found in morbidity, ie, oxygen dependency and rop rates. differences in perinatal (79% vs 45%) and neonatal (59% vs 32%) mortality rates were found between secondary and tertiary level hospitals. our study shows that even with modern perinatal technology and care, intrauterine and early deaths of elbw infants are common. the outcome of infants born at 22 to 23 gws was unfavorable, but the prognosis improved rapidly with increasing maturity. the clear regional and hospital level differences detected in survival rates and in short-term outcome of elbw infants emphasizes that the mortality and morbidity rates should be continuously followed and that differences should be evaluated in perinatal audit procedures. (abstract truncated)

to determine the mortality and morbidity for infants weighing 401 to 1500 g (very low birth weight [vlbw]) at birth by gestational age, birth weight, and gender. perinatal data were collected prospectively on an inborn cohort from january 1995 through december 1996 by 14 participating centers of the national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network and were compared with the corresponding data from previous reports. sociodemographic factors, perinatal events, and the neonatal course to 120 days of life, discharge, or death were evaluated. eighty four percent of 4438 infants weighing 501 to 1500 g at birth survived until discharge to home or to a long-term care facility (compared with 80% in 1991 and 74% in 1988). survival to discharge was 54% for infants 501 to 750 g at birth, 86% for those 751 to 1000 g, 94% for those 1001 to 1250 g, and 97% for those 1251 to 1500g. the incidence of chronic lung disease (cld; defined as receiving supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks' postmenstrual age; 23%), proven necrotizing enterocolitis (nec; 7%), and severe intracranial hemorrhage (ich; grade iii or iv; 11%) remained unchanged between 1991 and 1996. furthermore, 97% of all vlbw infants and 99% of infants weighing <1000 g at birth had weights less than the 10th percentile at 36 weeks' postmenstrual age. mortality for 195 infants weighing 401 to 500 g was 89%, with nearly all survivors developing cld. mortality in infants weighing 501 to 600 g was 71%; among survivors, 62% had cld, 35% had severe ich, and 15% had proven nec. survival for infants between 501 and 1500 g at birth continued to improve, particularly for infants weighing <1000 g at birth. this improvement in survival was not associated with an increase in major morbidities, because the incidence of cld, proven nec, and severe ich did not change. however, poor postnatal growth remains a major concern, occurring in 99% of infants weighing <1000 g at birth. mortality and major morbidity (cld, severe ich, and nec) remain high for the smallest infants, particularly those weighing <600 g at birth.

to assess the cognitive abilities in school-aged children who have been exposed to coumarins in utero. coumarin derivatives are an effective option for anticoagulant therapy in pregnant women. however, case reports describe anomalies of the fetal central nervous system after in utero exposure to coumarins. it is unclear whether prenatal exposure has an effect on cognitive functioning later in childhood. the exposed cohort consisted of 291 children from mothers who were prospectively registered because of coumarin treatment during pregnancy. the nonexposed cohort included 253 age-matched peers. an iq was estimated using subtests of the weschler intelligence scale for children-revised. educational achievement was examined with tests for reading, spelling, and arithmetic. in addition, schoolteachers were asked to judge performance on language and arithmetic. the observers were not aware of the exposure status of the child. no differences in mean iq were found between the exposed and nonexposed cohort (mean difference: -1.1; 95% confidence interval [ci]: -3.2-1.1), but an iq score below 80 was found in 11 children in the exposed compared with 3 children in the nonexposed cohort (odds ratio [or] = 3.1; ci: 0.8-11.6). regarding the tests for educational achievement, exposed children as a group performed as well as nonexposed controls. exposed boys, in comparison with nonexposed boys, showed a higher frequency of poor performance on reading (or = 2.9; ci: 1.1-7.4) and spelling (or = 2.5; ci: 1.0-6.0). cognitive functioning in coumarin-exposed children does not differ from nonexposed controls, but a minority of children seem to be prone to the potential negative effects of coumarins during pregnancy.

fibromyalgia has been recently recognized in children and adolescents as juvenile fibromyalgia (jf). in adult fibromyalgia, subjective complaints of nonrestorative sleep and fatigue are supported by altered polysomnographic findings including a primary sleep disorder known as periodic limb movements in sleep (plms) in some subjects. although poor sleep is a diagnostic criterion for jf, few reports in the literature have evaluated specific sleep disturbances. our objectives were to evaluate in a controlled study the polysomnographic findings of children and adolescents with jf for alterations in sleep architecture as well as possible plms not previously noted in this age group. sixteen consecutive children and adolescents (15.0 +/- 2.6 years of age) diagnosed with jf underwent overnight polysomnography. polysomnography was also performed on 14 controls (14.0 +/- 2.2 years of age) with no history of an underlying medical condition that could impact on sleep architecture. respiratory variables, sleep stages, and limb movements were measured during sleep in all subjects. jf subjects differed significantly from controls in sleep architecture. jf subjects presented with prolonged sleep latency, shortened total sleep time, decreased sleep efficiency, and increased wakefulness during sleep. in addition, jf subjects exhibited excessive movement activity during sleep. six of the jf subjects (38%) were noted to have an abnormally elevated plms index (>5/hour), indicating plms in these subjects. our study demonstrated abnormalities in sleep architecture in children with jf. we also noted plms in a significant number of subjects. this has not been reported previously in children with this disorder. we recommend that children who are evaluated for jf undergo polysomnography including plms assessment. juvenile fibromyalgia; periodic limb movement in sleep; restless legs syndrome.

necrotizing enterocolitis (nec) is primarily a disease of the premature infant. among children born at term, however, congenital heart disease may be an important predisposing factor for this condition. to determine risk factors for nec in patients with congenital heart disease, we conducted a case-control study of neonates with cardiac disease admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit at our center during the 4-year period from january 1995 to december 1998. cardiac diagnosis and age at admission were analyzed for association with nec among the 643-patient inception cohort. demographic, preoperative, and operative variables were recorded retrospectively in 21 neonates with congenital heart disease who developed nec and 70 control neonates matched by diagnosis and age at admission. using parametric and nonparametric analysis, cases and controls were compared with respect to previously identified risk factors for nec. among the entire cohort of 643 neonates with heart disease admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit, diagnoses of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (odds ratio [or] = 3.8 [1.6-9.1]) and truncus arteriosus or aortopulmonary window (or = 6.3 [1.7-23.6]) were independently associated with development of nec by multivariable analysis. in the case-control analysis, earlier gestational age at birth (36.7 +/- 2. 7 weeks vs 38.1 +/- 2.3 weeks), prematurity (or = 3.9 [1.2-12.5]), highest dose of prostaglandin >0.05 microg/kg/minute (or = 3.9 [1. 2-12.5]), and episodes of low cardiac output (meeting specific laboratory criteria) or clinical shock (or = 6.5 [1.8-23.5]) correlated with the development of nec. earlier gestational age and episodes of low output were the only factors that remained significantly associated with nec by multivariable analysis. although there was no difference in hospital mortality between patients with and without nec, mean hospital stay was significantly longer in those who developed nec (36 +/- 22 days vs 19 +/- 14 days). the risk of nec in neonates with congenital heart disease is substantial. factors associated with an elevated risk of nec in infants with heart disease include premature birth, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, truncus arteriosus, and episodes of poor systemic perfusion or shock. heightened suspicion is warranted in newborns with these risk factors.

to describe the difficulties in diagnosing visceral leishmaniasis (vl) when revealed by hemophagocytic syndrome (hs) in young children. retrospective study of patients identified over a 17-year period in french pediatric units. this series comprises 12 cases of vl that were either revealed (n = 11) or complicated (on starting treatment with antimony salts [n = 1]) by hs. clinical manifestations were those of severe vl with sustained high fever and hepatosplenomegaly in children in very poor condition. biological manifestations always included pancytopenia, marked hypofibrinogenemia and hypertriglyceridemia, hepatic cytolysis, and prominent hemophagocytosis on the bone marrow smear. these features led to transfer to a hematology unit. ten children were very young (<38 months) at onset (and consequently at infection). signs of autoimmunity (coombs' test-positive erythrocytes, antinuclear factors, and various autoantibodies) were found in 4 cases and were probably secondary to polyclonal b cell activation. serologic tests for leishmania were negative at onset in 6 children, and no amastigotes were found on the first marrow smear in 8 of 12 cases despite extensive search. seven patients had not visited foreign countries. all these factors explain the initial diagnostic confusion. three cases were initially misdiagnosed as familial erythrophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or infection-associated hs, and these patients were treated with etoposide (once for 5 months) to control the hs after failure of steroids. the diagnostic delay in these cases was 50, 74, and 134 days. when vl was finally diagnosed, amphotericin b monotherapy was effective in 4 cases. eight patients were treated with antimony salts; 4 were cured, 3 required adjunctive treatment, and 1 worsened (hs) and was cured with steroids and liposomal amphotericin. regardless of the type of therapy, all 12 children are presumed cured with a mean follow-up of 7 years (range: 6 months-16 years). a diagnosis of vl should, therefore, be seriously considered in all young patients with hs exposed to visceralizing leishmania sp in southern europe. clinicians and cytopathologists must be aware of the association. early diagnosis of vl will minimize unnecessary hospitalization and potentially harmful investigations and treatments.

environmental tobacco smoke (ets) exposure is a well-known health hazard for children. poor urban children may be at increased risk of exposure from nonparental sources of tobacco smoke. the unique problems of ets exposure in urban children have previously not been well-defined. this study was conducted: 1) to identify the sources of ets exposure for children attending a hospital-based pediatric resident practice; and 2) to examine caregivers' perceptions of the pediatrician's role and action in addressing ets exposure. questionnaires were administered to a convenience sample of 174 caregivers of children visiting a children's hospital-based resident practice. a structured face-to-face interview was used. all caregivers agreed to participate in the study. most of the caregivers interviewed were mothers (87.9%). although only 14% of caregivers were smokers, 49.4% reported caring for at least 1 smoke-exposed child. most smoke exposure occurred in the home; smoking is allowed in the home of 75% of the children who live with a smoker (48/64). thirty-four percent of the caregivers who reported no smoking in the home reported having a child who spends time in homes where other people smoke. most exposure outside the home occurred at a grandparent's home. a ban on smoking in the home did not eliminate a child's risk of residential smoke exposure but did predict whether smoking occurred in the same room as the child. all caregivers reported believing that tobacco smoke is harmful. approximately one half of caregivers who smoke (54.2%) would like smoking cessation advice from the child's pediatrician. interest in receiving advice on helping others quit smoking was also high (51.3%) among nonsmoking caregivers who cared for a smoke-exposed child. nonparental sources of ets exposure are reported to be common in urban children. children may be exposed to tobacco smoke even in homes where smoking is banned. many caregivers would like help from pediatricians in reducing children's exposure to tobacco smoke.

to determine the compliance to neonatal resuscitation program (nrp) guidelines in our institution, by the use of videotaped newborn resuscitations. nrp is the standard of care for newborn resuscitation. the application of nrp guidelines and resuscitation skills in actual clinical settings is undocumented. a video recorder, mounted to the radiant warmer in the main obstetrical operating room, was used to record all high-risk resuscitations. all members of the resuscitation team were nrp-certified. the videotapes were reviewed within 14 days of the resuscitation and then erased. this ongoing review was approved as a quality assurance (qa) project ensuring confidentiality under california law. the first 100 resuscitations were evaluated to assess nrp compliance. each step in the resuscitation (positioning, oxygen delivery, ventilation, chest compressions, intubation, and medication) was graded. a score was devised, with 2 points being awarded for every correct decision and proper procedure, 1 point for delayed interventions or inadequate technique, and zero points for indicated procedures that were omitted or for interventions that were not indicated. the total points were divided by the total possible points for that patient. the scores for the first 25 resuscitations (group 1) and the last 25 resuscitations (group 2) were compared. fifty-four percent of the 100 resuscitations had deviations from the nrp guidelines. ten percent received overly aggressive stimulation and 22% had poor suction technique. of the 78 infants given oxygen, this decision was considered incorrect in 15% and the delivery technique was poor in 10% of the infants given oxygen. of those requiring mask ventilation (n = 18), 24% had poor chest expansion, 11% used an incorrect rate, and 17% had inadequate reevaluation. twelve infants were intubated; only 7 were successfully intubated on the first attempt and only 4 were intubated in <20 seconds. the longest intubation attempt was 50 seconds. naloxone was given to 2 patients. one was breathing spontaneously with a heart rate >100. resuscitations receiving a perfect evaluation score were more likely to occur in infants needing less intervention. the level of resuscitation required for groups 1 and 2 were statistically similar. there was no difference in resuscitation scores between the 2 groups. only the inappropriate use of deep suctioning improved, with 8 of 25 events in group 1, and 0 of 25 in group 2. we have found a significant number of deviations from the nrp guidelines. video recording of actual clinical practice is a useful qa tool for monitoring the conduct of newborn resuscitation. we are now conducting repeat video assessments of individual nrp providers to determine whether there is improved performance.

the international guidelines 2000 conference on cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) and emergency cardiac care (ecc) formulated new evidenced-based recommendations for neonatal resuscitation. these guidelines comprehensively update the last recommendations, published in 1992 after the fifth national conference on cpr and ecc. as a result of the evidence evaluation process, significant changes occurred in the recommended management routines for: * meconium-stained amniotic fluid: if the newly born infant has absent or depressed respirations, heart rate <100 beats per minute (bpm), or poor muscle tone, direct tracheal suctioning should be performed to remove meconium from the airway. * preventing heat loss: hyperthermia should be avoided. * oxygenation and ventilation: 100% oxygen is recommended for assisted ventilation; however, if supplemental oxygen is unavailable, positive-pressure ventilation should be initiated with room air. the laryngeal mask airway may serve as an effective alternative for establishing an airway if bag-mask ventilation is ineffective or attempts at intubation have failed. exhaled co(2) detection can be useful in the secondary confirmation of endotracheal intubation. * chest compressions: compressions should be administered if the heart rate is absent or remains <60 bpm despite adequate assisted ventilation for 30 seconds. the 2-thumb, encircling-hands method of chest compression is preferred, with a depth of compression one third the anterior-posterior diameter of the chest and sufficient to generate a palpable pulse. * medications, volume expansion, and vascular access: epinephrine in a dose of 0.01-0.03 mg/kg (0.1-0.3 ml/kg of 1:10,000 solution) should be administered if the heart rate remains <60 bpm after a minimum of 30 seconds of adequate ventilation and chest compressions. emergency volume expansion may be accomplished with an isotonic crystalloid solution or o-negative red blood cells; albumin-containing solutions are no longer the fluid of choice for initial volume expansion. intraosseous access can serve as an alternative route for medications/volume expansion if umbilical or other direct venous access is not readily available. * noninitiation and discontinuation of resuscitation: there are circumstances (relating to gestational age, birth weight, known underlying condition, lack of response to interventions) in which noninitiation or discontinuation of resuscitation in the delivery room may be appropriate.

computer-based immunization tracking is a routine part of many pediatric practices; however, data quality is inconsistent and entry often relies on dedicated data entry personnel and is time-consuming, expensive, or difficult. the purpose of this study was to evaluate data quality, nursing satisfaction, and reduction in documentation burden after the introduction of a point-of-service immunization entry system in an inner-city pediatric primary care center. prospective preintervention and postintervention study. visit records from all pediatric nonurgent care visits for patients <5 years old were collected during a 2-week period before (preintervention) and after (postintervention) the introduction of a computer-based immunization entry system. nurses used software designed to allow rapid entry during immunization preparation followed by printing 2 adhesive labels for documentation. satisfaction was evaluated using an 8-question survey administered 3 months after the intervention. one hundred forty-seven (63.6%) of 231 preintervention and 132 (51.4%) of 257 postintervention children received at least 1 immunization (immunized) during the study visit. gender and mean age were similar for immunized children in the 2 groups. in the preintervention group, 56 (37.9%) of 147 immunized children had at least 1 dose missing (a total of 128 of 343 doses administered) from the immunization tracking database compared with none in the postintervention group. medical record review showed that 92.6% of preintervention and 91.4% of postintervention children were on-schedule after the study visit. however, missing data lead to the misclassification of preintervention children-only 68.4% were reported by the database to be on-schedule. all 9 nurses reported using the program all the time to enter immunizations, 89% said that the program required somewhat or a lot less time, and 100% strongly recommended continued use of the program. all 9 nurses also reported that they would be somewhat or very unenthusiastic about the system if labels were not available. during the 12 months after introduction of the system, 8273 forms containing immunization information were printed, preventing nurses from having to write >101,000 dates. immunization entry by nurses at the time of immunization preparation improves the quality of tracking data, reduces misclassification of immunization needs, saves time, and can be well-accepted. it is likely that poor data quality in some tracking systems has led to falsely low immunization coverage estimates. systems such as the one in this study can improve quality and should be integrated into routine clinical practice.

pneumococcal infections are the most common invasive bacterial infections in children in the united states. the incidence of invasive pneumococcal infections peaks in children younger than 2 years, reaching rates of 228/100,000 in children 6 to 12 months old. children with functional or anatomic asplenia (including sickle cell disease [scd]) and children with human immunodeficiency virus infection have pneumococcal infection rates 20- to 100-fold higher than those of healthy children during the first 5 years of life. others at high risk of pneumococcal infections include children with congenital immunodeficiency; chronic cardiopulmonary disease; children receiving immunosuppressive chemotherapy; children with immunosuppressive neoplastic diseases; children with chronic renal insufficiency, including nephrotic syndrome; children with diabetes; and children with cerebrospinal fluid leaks. children of native american (american indian and alaska native) or african american descent also have higher rates of invasive pneumococcal disease. outbreaks of pneumococcal infection have occurred with increased frequency in children attending out-of-home care. among these children, nasopharyngeal colonization rates of 60% have been observed, along with pneumococci resistant to multiple antibiotics. the administration of antibiotics to children involved in outbreaks of pneumococcal disease has had an inconsistent effect on nasopharyngeal carriage. in contrast, continuous penicillin prophylaxis in children younger than 5 years with scd has been successful in reducing rates of pneumococcal disease by 84%. pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines have been recommended since 1985 for children older than 2 years who are at high risk of invasive disease, but these vaccines were not recommended for younger children and infants because of poor antibody response before 2 years of age. in contrast, pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (prevnar) induce proposed protective antibody responses (>.15 microg/ml) in >90% of infants after 3 doses given at 2, 4, and 6 months of age. after priming doses, significant booster responses (ie, immunologic memory) are apparent when additional doses are given at 12 to 15 months of age. in efficacy trials, infant immunization with prevnar decreased invasive infections by >93% and consolidative pneumonia by 73%, and it was associated with a 7% decrease in otitis media and a 20% decrease in tympanostomy tube placement. adverse events after the administration of prevnar have been limited to areas of local swelling or erythema of 1 to 2 cm and some increase in the incidence of postimmunization fever when it is given with other childhood vaccines. based on data in phase 3 efficacy and safety trials, the us food and drug administration has provided an indication for the use of prevnar in children younger than 24 months.

few data are available in the literature regarding the long-term outcome of newborns with congenital complete heart block (chb). the aims of this retrospective study were to assess neonatal morbidity and mortality, incidences of dilated cardiomyopathy (dcm), and associated heart defects, and to establish prenatal and postnatal factors that might predict adverse outcome in children with chb. the cohort includes 91 infants with chb diagnosed in 5 tertiary centers in finland between 1950 and 1998. maternal connective tissue disease was evident in 89% of the patients. at birth, the median gestational age was 37.1 weeks, and the median weight was 2969 g. of the 91 infants, 60 (66%) were girls and 7 (8%) were twins. incidences of perinatal morbidity and mortality were 58% and 7%, respectively. the total mortality of chb was 16%; 11 of 15 (73%) died during the first 12 months. cumulative probability of survival at 10 years old was 82%. pacing as a newborn was indicated in 48 of 90 cases (53%), and 36 received pacemakers at older ages. cardiac defects not causally related to chb were found in 38 of 90 patients (42%), of whom 22 were operated on. dcm was found in 21 (23%), of whom 13 died. during the follow-up, among 75 survivors with a median age of 9 years, 54 (72%) are free from symptoms. poor outcome defined as clinically or pathologically evident congestive dcm was associated with intrauterine hydrops, low fetal and neonatal heart rate, low birth weight, male sex, and neonatal problems attributable to prematurity or neonatal lupus. despite early pacing, chb carries high mortality during the first 12 months of life. high incidences of dcm and associated heart defects indicate close echocardiographic monitoring of all children with chb.

adolescent obesity is becoming an increasing public health problem. this study determines: 1) differences in teen and parental report of obesity, 2) amount of misclassification using body mass index (bmi) from self-reported versus measured height and weight as an indicator of obesity, and 3) whether misclassification varies by gender and socioeconomic status. weighted data from 15 483 baseline (t1) youth and parental interviews from the national longitudinal study of adolescent health were used. seventy-four percent of teens were reinterviewed 1 year later (t2). parents reported socioeconomic status indicators and whether their teen was obese. teens reported height, weight, and weight perception. bmi was calculated from both self-reported height and weight at t1 and t2 and from measured height and weight at t2. those with a bmi > or =95% corrected for age and gender were considered obese. at t1, nearly one half of teens (47%) reporting they were very overweight were not obese by bmi. for teens obese by bmi, 19.6% were reported to be obese by both parent and teen, 6.4% by teen only, 29. 9% by parent only, and 44.2% by neither teen nor parent. for those with persistent obesity, teen and/or parental report failed to identify more than one third (34%) as obese; 23.4% were identified by both teen and parent report, 5.4% by teen report only, and 37.2% by parent only. at t2, the correlation between bmi calculated from self-reported versus measured height and weight for the overall population was very strong (r = .92). specificity of obesity status based on self-reported bmi, compared with obesity status based on measured bmi was .996; sensitivity, .722; positive predictive value, .860; and negative predictive value, .978. overall, 3.8% of teens were misclassified using self-report measures. girls were no more likely than boys to be misclassified as obese using bmi from self-reported height and weight. parental report is a better indicator of obesity than teen report of weight status, but parental and teen reports are both poor predictors of adolescent obesity. using bmi based on self-reported height and weight correctly classified 96% as to obesity status. thus, studies can use self-reported height and weight to understand teen obesity and its correlates/sequelae.

to evaluate the quality of care delivered to children suffering from index chronic diseases using specific indicators of health care delivery and to study the predictors of suboptimal quality of care (sqc) and its outcome on children. over a 9-month period, guidelines for optimal care were formulated. a specific questionnaire for every studied chronic disease was prepared in collaboration with the clinicians in charge of the diseased children (66% pediatricians and pediatric specialists and 34% adult specialists). the clinicians were asked to write the details of daily practice, ie, how these children were managed on a routine basis as well as in an emergency situation. a cross-sectional study was conducted over a 4-month period and included 953 children suffering from bronchial asthma (ba), childhood epilepsy (ce), type i diabetes mellitus (iddm), and rheumatic heart disease (rhd). a systematic random sample of children was selected from children visiting the ambulatory settings of all children's hospitals. every fourth child was selected on 2 randomly chosen days each week, while all diseased children admitted in the hospital settings of the children's hospitals during the study were included. a general form describing the impact of the diseases on the child was prepared. a network of clinicians was created in all children's hospitals; seminars were held during which the content validity of the questionnaire was tested. items were evaluated for their internal consistency using the cronbach alpha. according to the degree of adherence to the recent therapeutic guidelines concerning selected indicators of the quality of care specific to every disease, children were categorized as receiving optimal quality of care or sqc. these indicators were: the use of inhaled bronchodilators in acute asthmatic attacks in mild asthma and the use of the prophylactic drugs (inhaled sodium cromoglycate or inhaled beclomethasone) in moderate to severe chronic ba in between acute asthmatic attacks; compliance with antiepileptic drugs in epileptic children; regular performance of self-monitoring of blood glucose and/or urine testing in diabetic children; and compliance with prophylactic antibiotics in children suffering from rhd. the records of the outpatient clinics for ambulatory and hospitalized cases were reviewed to assess the degree of compliance with the prescribed management before the index visit. sociodemographic characteristics and health care system-related predictors of sqc were analyzed via stepwise logistic regression analysis. the impact of illness on the child was assessed by 7 items which were: dependence on parents in domestic activities, level of activity compared with peers, mood compared with peers, level of socializing, degree of discomfort attributable to illness, level of physical disadvantage, and urinary incontinence. factor analysis with varimax rotation was performed on items related to the impact of illness. parental satisfaction with care was rated as excellent, very good, fair, or poor. information on school outcome was obtained by asking the caretakers whether the child was able to attend school regularly despite his sickness. scholastic achievement was also rated as excellent, very good, good, and acceptable. parents were asked whether the child had ever repeated a grade because of his sickness. ambulatory and hospital settings of all children's hospitals in alexandria, egypt. only 52% of mild asthmatics were given inhaled bronchodilators during acute attacks and 6.84% of moderate to severe asthmatics were taking prophylactic drugs (inhaled sodium cromoglycate and/or inhaled beclomethasone) between acute attacks. similarly, only 53 of 134 (39.6%) of diabetic children were regularly performing self-monitoring of blood glucose and/or urine testing. in contrast, in epileptic children, 121 of 173 (69.9%) were judged as being compliant by their managing clinicians and more than two

a multicenter retrospective study was conducted to investigate the possible metabolic causes of pediatric cardiomyopathy and evaluate the outcome of patients treated with l-carnitine. seventy-six patients diagnosed with cardiomyopathy were treated with l-carnitine in addition to conventional cardiac treatment, and 145 patients were treated with conventional treatment only. there were 101 males and 120 females between 1 day and 18 years old. cardiomyopathy diagnoses included dilated (148 patients), hypertrophic (42 patients), restrictive (16 patients), mixed diagnosis (11 patients), and 4 with an unknown type. of 76 l-carnitine-treated patients, 29 (38%) had evidence to suggest a disorder of metabolism, and of 145 control patients, 15 (10%) were suspected to have a disorder of metabolism. these metabolic disorders were thought to be the cause for the cardiomyopathy of the patients. the duration of l-carnitine treatment ranged from 2 weeks to >1 year. information was collected on length of survival (time-to-event), clinical outcome, echocardiogram parameters, and clinical assessments. data were collected at intervals from baseline to study endpoint, death, transplant, or last known follow-up visit. l-carnitine-treated patients were younger than control patients and had poorer clinical functioning at baseline, yet they demonstrated lower mortality and a level of clinical functioning and clinical severity comparable to control patients on conventional therapy by the end of the study. an analysis of the interaction between clinical outcome and concomitant medications unexpectedly revealed that the population of patients treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors (40% of patients) had significantly poorer survival (although their greater likelihood for poor survival may possibly have made them more likely to receive ace inhibitors). results suggest that l-carnitine provides clinical benefit in treating pediatric cardiomyopathy. there is a need for further exploration of potential explanatory factors for the higher mortality observed in the population of patients treated with ace inhibitors.

the purposes of this study were to report the neurodevelopmental, neurosensory, and functional outcomes of 1151 extremely low birth weight (401-1000 g) survivors cared for in the 12 participating centers of the national institute of child health and human development neonatal research network, and to identify medical, social, and environmental factors associated with these outcomes. a multicenter cohort study in which surviving extremely low birth weight infants born in 1993 and 1994 underwent neurodevelopmental, neurosensory, and functional assessment at 18 to 22 months' corrected age. data regarding pregnancy and neonatal outcome were collected prospectively. socioeconomic status and a detailed interim medical history were obtained at the time of the assessment. logistic regression models were used to identify maternal and neonatal risk factors for poor neurodevelopmental outcome. of the 1480 infants alive at 18 months of age, 1151 (78%) were evaluated. study characteristics included a mean birth weight of 796 +/- 135 g, mean gestation (best obstetric dates) 26 +/- 2 weeks, and 47% male. birth weight distributions of infants included 15 infants at 401 to 500 g; 94 at 501 to 600 g; 208 at 601 to 700 g; 237 at 701 to 800 g; 290 at 801 to 900 g; and 307 at 901 to 1000 g. twenty-five percent of the children had an abnormal neurologic examination, 37% had a bayley ii mental developmental index <70, 29% had a psychomotor developmental index <70, 9% had vision impairment, and 11% had hearing impairment. neurologic, developmental, neurosensory, and functional morbidities increased with decreasing birth weight. factors significantly associated with increased neurodevelopmental morbidity included chronic lung disease, grades 3 to 4 intraventricular hemorrhage/periventricular leukomalacia, steroids for chronic lung disease, necrotizing enterocolitis, and male gender. factors significantly associated with decreased morbidity included increased birth weight, female gender, higher maternal education, and white race. elbw infants are at significant risk of neurologic abnormalities, developmental delays, and functional delays at 18 to 22 months' corrected age.

the rate of prematurity in the united states has increased over the past 15 years despite a reduction in overall infant mortality and birth weight-specific mortality. the major factors contributing to premature birth exist before pregnancy and therefore will require intervention strategies in the pediatric patient. the high-risk factors include young age at conception (16 years), use of illicit drugs and smoking, poor nutritional status, and certain vaginal infections. pediatric intervention strategies should include sociologic as well as health education stressing heightened self-esteem and communication skills, avoidance of pregnancy and unprotected sexual activity, avoidance of smoking and drug use, and promotion of a good nutritional status.

risk-adjusted severity of illness is frequently used in clinical research and quality assessments. although there are multiple methods designed for neonates, they have been infrequently compared and some have not been assessed in large samples of very low birth weight (vlbw; <1500 g) infants. to test and compare published neonatal mortality prediction models, including clinical risk index for babies (crib), score for neonatal acute physiology (snap), snap-perinatal extension (snap-pe), neonatal therapeutic interventions scoring system, the national institute of child health and human development (nichd) network model, and other individual admission factors such as birth weight, low apgar score (<7 at 5 minutes), and small for gestational age status in a cohort of vlbw infants from the washington, dc area. data were collected on 476 vlbw infants admitted to 8 neonatal intensive care units between october 1994 and february 1997. the calibration (closeness of total observed deaths to the predicted total) of models with published coefficients (snap-pe, crib, and nichd) was assessed using the standardized mortality ratio. discrimination was quantified as the area under the curve (auc) for the receiver operating characteristic curves. calibrated models were derived for the current database using logistic regression techniques. goodness-of-fit of predicted to observed probabilities of death was assessed with the hosmer-lemeshow goodness-of-fit test. the calibration of published algorithms applied to our data was poor. the standardized mortality ratios for the nichd, crib, and snap-pe models were.65,.56, and.82, respectively. discrimination of all the models was excellent (range:.863-.930). surprisingly, birth weight performed much better than in previous analyses, with an auc of.869. the best models using both 12- and 24-hour postadmission data, significantly outperformed the best model based on birth data only but were not significantly different from each other. the variables in the best model were birth weight, birth weight squared, low 5-minute apgar score, and snap (auc =.930). published models for severity of illness overpredicted hospital mortality in this set of vlbw infants, indicating a need for frequent recalibration. discrimination for these severity of illness scores remains excellent. birth variables should be reevaluated as a method to control for severity of illness in predicting mortality.

unmet need for health care is a critical indicator of access problems. among children, unmet need for care has special significance inasmuch as the failure to obtain treatment can affect health status and functioning in the near- and long-term. the purpose of this study was to present current prevalence estimates and descriptive characteristics of children with unmet health needs using nationally representative household survey data. we analyzed 4 years of national health interview survey data spanning 1993 through 1996. our analysis included 97 206 children <18 years old. measures of unmet need for medical care, dental care, prescription medications, and vision care were obtained from an adult household member (usually the mother) responding for the child. bivariate and multivariate analyses were used to assess the degree to which unmet need was related to the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of the child and family. overall, 7.3% (4.7 million) of us children experienced at least 1 unmet health care need. dental care was the most prevalent unmet need. after adjustment for confounding factors, near-poor and poor children were both about 3 times more likely to have an unmet need as nonpoor children (adjusted odds ratio [95% confidence interval] = 2.89 [2.52, 3.32], 3.0 [2.53, 3.56], respectively). uninsured children were also about 3 times more likely to have an unmet need as privately insured children (adjusted odds ratio [95% confidence interval] = 2. 92 [2.58, 3.32]). despite the nation's great wealth, unmet health needs remain prevalent among us children. a combined public policy that addresses financial and nonfinancial barriers to care is required to reduce the prevalence of unmet need for health care.

factors that contribute to adverse sedation events in children undergoing procedures were examined using the technique of critical incident analysis. we developed a database that consists of descriptions of adverse sedation events derived from the food and drug administration's adverse drug event reporting system, from the us pharmacopeia, and from a survey of pediatric specialists. one hundred eighteen reports were reviewed for factors that may have contributed to the adverse sedation event. the outcome, ranging in severity from death to no harm, was noted. individual reports were first examined separately by 4 physicians trained in pediatric anesthesiology, pediatric critical care medicine, or pediatric emergency medicine. only reports for which all 4 reviewers agreed on the contributing factors and outcome were included in the final analysis. of the 95 incidents with consensus agreement on the contributing factors, 51 resulted in death, 9 in permanent neurologic injury, 21 in prolonged hospitalization without injury, and in 14 there was no harm. patients receiving sedation in nonhospital-based settings compared with hospital-based settings were older and healthier. the venue of sedation was not associated with the incidence of presenting respiratory events (eg, desaturation, apnea, laryngospasm, approximately 80% in each venue) but more cardiac arrests occurred as the second (53.6% vs 14%) and third events (25% vs 7%) in nonhospital-based facilities. inadequate resuscitation was rated as being a determinant of adverse outcome more frequently in nonhospital-based events (57.1% vs 2.3%). death and permanent neurologic injury occurred more frequently in nonhospital-based facilities (92.8% vs 37.2%). successful outcome (prolonged hospitalization without injury or no harm) was associated with the use of pulse oximetry compared with a lack of any documented monitoring that was associated with unsuccessful outcome (death or permanent neurologic injury). in addition, pulse oximetry monitoring of patients sedated in hospitals was uniformly associated with successful outcomes whereas in the nonhospital-based venue, 4 out of 5 suffered adverse outcomes. adverse outcomes despite the benefit of an early warning regarding oxygenation likely reflect lack of skill in assessment and in the use of appropriate interventions, ie, a failure to rescue the patient. this study-a critical incident analysis-identifies several features associated with adverse sedation events and poor outcome. there were differences in outcomes for venue: adverse outcomes (permanent neurologic injury or death) occurred more frequently in a nonhospital-based facility, whereas successful outcomes (prolonged hospitalization or no harm) occurred more frequently in a hospital-based setting. inadequate resuscitation was more often associated with a nonhospital-based setting. inadequate and inconsistent physiologic monitoring (particularly failure to use or respond appropriately to pulse oximetry) was another major factor contributing to poor outcome in all venues. other issues rated by the reviewers were: inadequate presedation medical evaluation, lack of an independent observer, medication errors, and inadequate recovery procedures. uniform, specialty-independent guidelines for monitoring children during and after sedation are essential. age and size-appropriate equipment and medications for resuscitation should be immediately available regardless of the location where the child is sedated. all health care providers who sedate children, regardless of practice venue, should have advanced airway assessment and management training and be skilled in the resuscitation of infants and children so that they can successfully rescue their patient should an adverse sedation event occur.

the recently enacted state children's health insurance program (schip), designed to provide affordable health insurance for uninsured children, was modeled in part on new york state's child health plus (chplus), which was implemented in 1991. all schip programs involve voluntary enrollment of eligible children. little is known about characteristics of children who enroll in these programs. to provide a profile of children enrolled in chplus between 1993 and 1994 in the 6-county upstate new york study area, and to estimate the participation rate in chplus. methods. a parent interview was conducted to obtain information about children, 0 to 6.9 years old, who enrolled in chplus in the study area. two school-based surveys and the current population survey were used to estimate health insurance coverage. enrollment data from new york state's department of health, together with estimates of the uninsured, were used to estimate participation rates in chplus. most children enrolled in chplus in the study area were white. although 17% of all children in the study area who were <13 years old and living in families with incomes below 160% of the federal poverty level were black, only 9% of chplus-enrolled children were black. twenty-one percent of enrolled children were uninsured during the entire year before enrollment and 61% of children had a gap in coverage lasting >1 month. children were generally healthy; only 4% had fair or poor health. eighty-eight percent of parents of enrolled children had completed high school or a higher level of education. parents reported that loss of a job was the main reason for loss of prior health insurance for their child. most families learned about chplus from a friend (30%) or from their doctor (26%). the uninsured rate among children in the study area was approximately 4.1%. by 1993, the participation rate in chplus was about 36%. blacks were underrepresented in chplus. because the underlying uninsured rate was relatively low and parental education and family income were relatively high, the effects of chplus observed in this evaluation may be conservative in comparison to the potential effects of chplus for other populations of children. participation rates during the early years of the program were modest.

the legislation and funding of the state children's health insurance program (schip) in 1997 resulted in the largest public investment in child health care in 30 years. the program was designed to provide health insurance for the estimated 11 million uninsured children in the united states. in 1991 new york state implemented a state-funded program-child health plus (chplus)-intended to provide health insurance for uninsured children who were ineligible for medicaid. the program became one of the prototypes for schip: this study was designed to measure the association between chplus and access to care, utilization of care, quality of care, and health care costs to understand the potential impact of one type of prototype schip program. the study took place in the 6-county region of upstate new york around and including the city of rochester. a before-and-during design was used to compare children's health care for the year before they enrolled in chplus versus the first year during enrollment in chplus. the study included 1828 children (ages 0-6.99 years at enrollment) who enrolled between november 1, 1991 and august 1, 1993. a substudy involved 187 children 2 to 12.99 years old who had asthma. data collection involved: 1) interviews of parents to obtain information about demographics, sources of health care, experience and satisfaction with chplus, and perceived impact of chplus; 2) medical chart reviews at all primary care offices, emergency departments, and health department clinics in the 6-county region to measure utilization of health services; 3) claims analysis to assess costs of care during chplus and to impute costs before chplus; and 4) analyses of existing datasets including the current population survey, national health interview survey, and statewide hospitalization datasets to anchor the study in relation to the statewide chplus population and to assess secular trends in child health care. logistic regression and poisson regression were used to compare the means of dependent measures with and without chplus coverage, while controlling for age, prior insurance type, and gap in insurance coverage before chplus.  only one third of chplus-eligible children throughout new york state had enrolled in the program by 1993. lower enrollment rates occurred among hispanic and black children than among white children, and among children from lowest income levels. profile of chplus enrollees: most enrollees were either previously uninsured, had medicaid but were no longer eligible, or had parents who either lost a job and related private insurance coverage or could no longer afford commercial or private insurance. most families heard about chplus from a friend, physician, or insurer. television, radio, and newspaper advertisements were not major sources of information. nearly all families had at least 1 employed parent. two thirds of the children resided in 2-parent households. parents reported that most children were in excellent or good health and only a few were in poor health. the enrolled population was thus a relatively low-risk, generally healthy group of children in low-income, working families. access and utilization of health care: utilization of primary care increased dramatically after enrollment in chplus, compared with before chplus. visits to primary care medical homes for preventive, acute, and chronic care increased markedly. visits to medical homes also increased for children with asthma. there was, however, no significant association between enrollment in chplus and changes in utilization of emergency departments, specialty services, or inpatient care. quality of care: chplus was associated with improvements in many measures involving quality of primary care, including preventive visits, immunization rates, use of the medical home for health care, compliance with preventive guidelines, and parent-reported health status of the child. (abstract truncated)

sports injuries account for substantial morbidity and medical cost. to direct intervention, a population-based study of the causes and types of sports injuries was undertaken. an injury surveillance system was established at all trauma center hospitals that treat residents 10 to 19 years old in the district of columbia and the chief medical examiner's office. medical record abstractions were completed for those seen in an emergency department, admitted to the hospital, or who died from injury june 1996 through june 1998. seventeen percent (n = 2563) of all injuries occurred while participating in 1 of 6 sports (baseball/softball, basketball, biking, football, skating, and soccer) resulting in an event-based injury rate of 25.0 per 1000 adolescents or 25.0/1000 population year. rates were higher in males for all sports. the most common mechanisms were falls (e880-888) and being struck by or against objects (e916-918). hospitalization was required in 2% of visits and there were no deaths. of those requiring hospitalization, 51% involved other persons, 12% were equipment-related, and 8% involved poor field/surface conditions. of all baseball injuries, 55% involved ball or bat impact often of the head. basketball injuries included several injuries from striking against the basketball pole or rim or being struck by a falling pole or backboard. biking injuries requiring admission included 2 straddle injuries onto the bike center bar and collision with motor vehicles. of all football injuries, 48 (7%) involved being struck by an opponent's helmet and 63 (9%) involved inappropriate field conditions including falls on or against concrete, glass, or fixed objects. in soccer there were 4 goal post injuries and a large proportion of intracranial injuries. there were 51 probable or clear assaults during sports and an additional 30 to 41 injuries from baseball bat assaults. many sports including noncontact sports involved injuries of the head suggesting the need for improved head protection. injuries involving collisions with others and assaults point to the need for supervision and enforcement of safety rules. the 16% of sports injury visits and 20% of hospitalizations related to equipment and environmental factors suggest that at least this proportion of injury may be amenable to preventive strategies. design change may be warranted for prevention of equipment-related injuries. the many injuries involving inappropriate sports settings suggest the need for and use of available and safe locations for sports.

a recent trend in the treatment of asthma has been the widespread, independent use of peak expiratory flow (pef). we examined whether pef monitoring creates inaccuracies in assessment of children with moderate to severe asthma. we compared the negative predictive value of pef in relation to the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (fev(1)), and to the forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of the vital capacity (fef(25-75%)) at different levels of air trapping as determined by the residual volume over total lung capacity ratio (rv/tlc). the study included 244 patients, ages 4 to 18 years with all classes of asthma severity, with fev(1) ranging from 28% to 134% of predicted value. we analyzed 367 sets of pulmonary function tests performed throughout a 3-year period. thirty percent of patients with a normal pef value had an abnormal fev(1) or fef(25-75%). as air trapping increased, the ability of a normal pef to predict normal fev(1) and fef(25-75%) readings fell from 83% to 53%. the negative predictive value was significantly lower for patients with rv/tlc ratio >30 compared with patients with rv/tlc <30. the results of this study suggest that it might be possible to identify children for whom the pef is likely to give false-negative results. as air trapping increases, it causes the pef to give misleading reassurance of normal pulmonary function. furthermore, poor predictiveness of pef is obtained when values 80% of predicted for age are considered normal.

to assess pediatricians' knowledge, attitudes, and professional experience regarding oral health, and to determine willingness to incorporate fluoride varnish into their practices. poor and minority children suffer disproportionately from dental caries and have limited access to dental care. in a recent analysis of national survey data, the general accounting office reported that poor children had 5 times more untreated decay than did children from higher income families. untreated decay can lead to problems with eating, speaking, and attending to learning. children who are poor suffer 12 times the number of restricted activity days because of dental problems, compared with more affluent children. despite higher rates of dental decay, poor children had one half the number of dental visits compared with higher income children in 1996. medicaid's early periodic screening diagnosis and treatment (epsdt) program is intended to provide regular dental screenings and appropriate treatment but has apparently played a limited role in improving access to dental care for poor children. according to a report by the office of the inspector general of the department of health and human services, only 20% of children under 21 years of age, who were enrolled in medicaid and eligible for epsdt, actually received preventive dental services. by increasing their involvement in oral health prevention during well-child care visits, pediatricians may be able to play an important role in improving the dental health of their patients who have difficulty obtaining access to professional dental care. however, it is unclear to what degree pediatricians are knowledgeable about preventive oral health and the extent to which they may already be participating in prevention and assessment. also, little is known about the incidence of dental problems in pediatric practice, and whether pediatricians perceive barriers to their patients' receiving professional dental care. finally, it is important to know how pediatricians value the promotion of oral health and whether they would be willing to take on additional activities aimed at its improvement. we addressed these questions in a national survey of pediatricians. we surveyed a national sample of 1600 pediatricians randomly selected from the american medical association master file to assess their knowledge, current practice, and opinion on their role in the promotion of oral health; experience with dental decay among patients and in referring patients for professional dental care; and willingness to apply fluoride varnish. of 1386 eligible survey recipients, 862 returned surveys for a response rate of 62%. respondents reported seeing dental problems regularly. two thirds of respondents observed caries in their school-aged patients at least once a month. of the respondents, 55% reported difficulty achieving successful dental referrals for their uninsured patients and 38% reported difficulty referring their medicaid patients. more than 90% of the respondents agreed that they had an important role in identifying dental problems and counseling families on the prevention of caries. moreover, respondents were interested in increasing their involvement: 74% expressed a willingness to apply fluoride varnish in their practices. one half of the respondents, however, reported no previous training in dental health issues during medical school or residency, and only 9% correctly answered all 4 knowledge questions. access to dental care and unmet dental health needs are serious, under addressed problems for poor and minority children in the united states. in promoting preventive oral health, pediatricians benefit all children and particularly the underserved. we know of 2 states, washington and north carolina, that have acknowledged, through the provision of reimbursement, that pediatricians have a unique opportunity at well-child care visits to provide caries prevention c

although there is clear evidence of the influence of parental factors on child health outcomes, the influence of parental perceptions of their health and illness on the reporting of child health remains primarily unknown. to examine relationships between parents' reporting of their own health and illness with the reporting of their children's health and illness. we surveyed parents of a representative population-based sample of children aged 5 to 18 years. one parent of each child completed a written questionnaire including the child health questionnaire, a subjective measure of functional health and well-being, and an assessment of self-reported parental health and illness. logistic regression models were used to examine relationships between parent and child health and illness. 5340 parents responded (86% mothers, 14% fathers). after adjusting for confounding effects, parents self-reporting poor health had increased odds of reporting their children with poor health (odds ratio: 7.5), although the effect was modified by parent gender. there were increased odds of mothers with self-reporting poor global health reporting their children with poor global health and illness (odds ratio: 9.0 and 2.5, respectively) that were not observed for fathers. a mother's self-reported health is strongly associated with her reporting of her child's health; this was not observed for fathers. these results suggest that parental gender should be considered as a mediating factor in the reporting of child health.

written materials used in pediatric public health settings often exceed the reading skills of caretakers. to compare a pictorial anticipatory guidance (pag) sheet requiring limited reading skills to a tipp (the injury prevention program) sheet for providing injury prevention information to low-income urban families. a convenience sample of families with children treated at an urban pediatric clinic affiliated with a teaching hospital. methods. parents of children =6 years old received either a pag sheet or a tipp sheet during a well-child care clinic visit; parents of children seen in the morning clinic received a pag sheet and those seen during the afternoon clinic a tipp sheet. all also received injury prevention counseling by a clinic nurse. the recall of injury prevention information was assessed by telephone questionnaire 14 to 28 days after the clinic encounter. we interviewed 66 parents (57% of families enrolled): 46 were in the pag group and 20 in the tipp group. there were no differences between groups in mean parent age, percent minority race, or percent public aid. eighty-seven percent of pag and 100% of tipp parents recalled receiving an information sheet; 17% of pag and 20% of tipp parents could recall no specific injury topics. the mean number of topics recalled was 2.1 +/- 1.5 from parents in the pag group and 1.6 +/- 1.1 from those in the tipp group. no specific injury topic was recalled by more than half the parents in either group. recall of injury information several weeks after a clinic visit is limited. the use of pag sheets did not improve recall; lack of literacy is not the sole cause of poor recall. successful injury prevention counseling in this population may require comprehensive and repetitive efforts.

childhood asthma morbidity and mortality are increasing despite improvements in asthma therapy. we hypothesized that a substantial number of children with moderate to severe asthma are not taking the maintenance medications recommended by national guidelines. the objective of this study was to describe medication use among us children with asthma and determine risk factors for inadequate therapy. the national health and nutrition examination survey (nhanes) iii 1988-1994 provided cross-sectional, parent-reported data for children 2 months to 16 years of age. analysis focused on children with moderate to severe asthma (defined as having any hospitalization for wheezing, >/=2 acute visits for wheezing, or >/=3 episodes of wheezing over the past year). we defined these children as adequately treated if they had taken a maintenance medication (inhaled corticosteroid, cromolyn, or theophylline) during the past month. demographic variables were analyzed for independent associations with inadequacy of therapy. the statistical analysis used sudaan software to account for the complex sampling design. a total of 1025 children (9.4%) had physician-diagnosed asthma. of those with moderate to severe asthma (n = 524), only 26% had taken a maintenance medication during the past month. even among children with 2 or more hospitalizations over the previous year, only 32% had taken maintenance medications. in a logistic regression analysis, factors significantly associated with inadequate therapy included: age =5 years, medicaid insurance, and spanish language. children surveyed after 1991, when national guidelines for asthma management became available, were no more likely to have taken maintenance medications than children surveyed before 1991. most children with moderate to severe asthma in this nationally representative sample, including those with multiple hospitalizations, did not receive adequate asthma therapy. these children may incur avoidable morbidity. young children, poor children, and children from spanish-speaking families appear to be at particularly high risk for inadequate therapy.

the outcome in adolescence of children diagnosed as dyslexic during the early years of school was examined in children prospectively identified in childhood and continuously followed to young adulthood. this sample offers a unique opportunity to investigate a prospectively identified sample of adolescents for whom there is no question of the childhood diagnosis and in whom highly analytic measures of reading and language can be administered in adolescence. children were recruited from the connecticut longitudinal study, a cohort of 445 children representative of those children entering public kindergarten in connecticut in 1983. two groups were selected when the children were in grade 9: children who met criteria for persistent reading disability in grades 2 through 6 (persistently poor readers [ppr]; n = 21) and a comparison group of nondisabled children, subdivided into average readers (n = 35) and superior readers (n = 39). in grade 9, each child received a comprehensive assessment of academic, language, and other cognitive skills. measures of phonological awareness (but not orthographic awareness) were most significant in differentiating the 3 reading groups, with smaller contributions from measures of word finding and digit-span. academic measures that best separated good from poor readers were decoding and spelling, whereas measures of math and reading comprehension did not. measures of phonological awareness, followed next by teacher rating of academic skills were the best predictors of decoding, reading rate, and reading accuracy. in contrast, the best predictor of reading comprehension was word finding, with digit span and socioeconomic status also contributing significantly. using a growth curve model (quadratic model of growth to a plateau) all 3 groups demonstrated similar patterns of growth over time, with the superior group outperforming the average group, and the average group outperforming the ppr group. there was no evidence that the children in the ppr group catch up in their reading skills. deficits in phonological coding continue to characterize dyslexic readers even in adolescence; performance on phonological processing measures contributes most to discriminating dyslexic and average readers, and average and superior readers as well. these data support and extend the findings of previous investigators indicating the continuing contribution of phonological processing to decoding words, reading rate, and accuracy and spelling. children with dyslexia neither spontaneously remit nor do they demonstrate a lag mechanism for catching up in the development of reading skills. in adolescents, the rate of reading as well as facility with spelling may be most useful clinically in differentiating average from poor readers.

to determine the utility of plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnf), interleukin 1 beta (il-1), and interleukin 6 (il-6) in the prediction of occult bacteremia in febrile, young children. prospective, case-control study conducted in a large, urban, children's hospital emergency department. eligibility criteria were: 0 to 36 months of age, febrile, nontoxic appearing, immunocompetent, no apparent bacterial source for fever on physical examination, and blood culture obtained. additional blood, procured at the time of the blood culture, was analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for tnf, il-1, and il-6. children with positive blood cultures for pathogenic bacteria served as cases. two age-matched controls for each case were selected from the children with negative cultures. out of 1329 enrollees, 33 cases and 66 controls were evaluated. il-6 levels were significantly higher for the cases than controls but with moderate overlap in their ranges. tnf and il-1 levels were not significantly different between cases and controls. height of fever, duration of fever, acute illness observation score, absolute band count, and white blood cell count were all much less predictive of bacteremia than either il-6 or absolute neutrophil count (anc). the optimum il-6 threshold value had a sensitivity of 88%, a specificity of 70%, a positive predictive value (ppv) of 7.0%, a negative predictive value (npv) of 99.6%, and an odds ratio (or) of 16.7 (95% confidence interval [ci], 4.8-71.6). the optimum anc threshold value had a sensitivity of 82%, a specificity of 74%, a ppv of 7.5%, a npv of 99.4%, and an or of 12.8 (95% ci, 3.2-59.7). the best predictor was a combination of il-6 and anc. it had a sensitivity of 100%, a specificity of 78%, a ppv of 10.4%, a npv of 100%, and an or which is undefined because of the 100% sensitivity (95% ci, 33.0-infinity). for comparison, a wbc >15 x 10(9) cells/l had a sensitivity of 48%, a specificity of 79%, a ppv of 5.5%, a npv of 98.3%, and an or of 3. 5 (95% ci, 1.1-10.7). in febrile children 0 to 36 months of age, il-6 levels may be helpful in the prediction of occult bacteremia, but tnf and il-1 levels are not. il-6 levels alone or notably when combined with an anc were more predictive of occult bacteremia than traditional tests and clinical criteria. the wide range in the il-6 values for cases and controls detracts from the precision of the findings. the lack of rapid processing and clinical availability of il-6 assays hampers its present application. however, despite these drawbacks and given the poor ability of traditional clinical and laboratory criteria to predict occult bacteremia, these results suggest a possible future role for il-6 in predicting occult bacteremia when rapid assays become available.

to determine the percentage of children who had insurance coverage in the 12 months preceding enrollment in a state-subsidized program; the percentage of parents who had access to employer-based family coverage; and the cost of the families' share of the premium per month. we randomly selected 930 families whose children were enrolled in the florida healthy kids program for a period of between 1 and 3 months and conducted telephone interviews with them in 1998 about their children's insurance coverage before program entry and their access to employer-based family coverage. there were 653 families in the final sample. only 5% of the children had employer-based coverage before program enrollment. however, 26% had access to family coverage through their employers with the family share of the premiums representing on average 13% of their incomes. access to employer-based coverage varied significantly by family income. throughout the development of the state children's health insurance program legislation, policy analysts expressed concern that families may crowd out or substitute a subsidized state plan for employer-based coverage. this substitution could result in fewer improvements in access to care and health status than were anticipated, because families are simply moving to a different form of health insurance. there is some degree of crowd out in the healthy kids program. the economic burden to near-poor families to purchase employer-based coverage is significant. some degree of substitution may need to be tolerated to ensure that children receive needed health insurance.

the limited literature available to date suggests that the use of delivery room cardiopulmonary resuscitation (dr-cpr) is associated with very poor outcomes, especially for extremely low birth weight infants. we reviewed the cumulative experience of the vermont oxford network to determine the actual utilization of dr-cpr and the neonatal outcomes of such infants. a retrospective review of information available in the vermont oxford network database for the years 1994 to 1996. the data set was collected from 196 neonatal units who participate in the network (data for infants 401 to 500 g were from 1996 only). infants were eligible for study if they received dr-cpr defined as the administration of chest compressions and/or epinephrine in the delivery room as noted on the vermont oxford network database record. information regarding survival was available for 27 707 newborns with birth weights from 501 to 1500 g, and 497 infants with birth weights from 401 to 500 g. there were 24 001 (86.6%) survivors. overall dr-cpr was given to 9.3% of infants from 401 to 500 g and 6% of infants from 501 to 1500 g, 82.1% receiving chest compressions, and 66.7% receiving epinephrine. survival of infants receiving dr-cpr was 23. 9% for infants of 401 to 500 g, and 63.3% for infants of 501 to 1500 g, compared with 16.7% and 87.9% for infants in these weight groups not receiving dr-cpr. survival was greater for infants of 501 g or greater without dr-cpr compared with those who received this intervention within each 250-g birth weight subgroup. for infants of <1000 g, survival was 53.8% with dr-cpr compared with 74.9% without. head ultrasounds were available for 95.5% of all surviving infants and 96.7% of infants who received dr-cpr. overall, any grade of intraventricular hemorrhage (ivh) occurred more frequently in infants who received dr-cpr (38%) than in those who did not (21%). grade 3 or 4 (severe) ivh was seen in 15.3% of infants who received dr-cpr compared with 4.9% of the infants who did not. overall, survival without severe ivh occurred in 52.2% of dr-cpr infants compared with 81.3% of infants who did not require this intervention. the majority of very low birth weight and extremely low birth weight infants who receive dr-cpr survive, and at least half of such infants who survive do not have evidence of severe ivh. further follow-up studies are required to determine the long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of such infants. the current study does not support the previously noted poor outcome in extremely low birth weight infants who receive dr-cpr.

experimental undernutrition in animals, during the critical brain development period, produces retardation of brain growth as well as a number of different morphologic and functional abnormalities in neurons, mainly in the dendritic synaptic apparatus. these alterations are the cause of the poor neurointegrative development that occurs in experimental malnutrition. severe malnutrition during early postnatal life in humans is known to produce similar neurointegrative disorders as well as mental retardation, but there are very few studies describing the morphology of the dendritic apparatus in infants suffering from this condition. to study the dendritic spine density and morphology in dendrites from cortical neurons in infants dying from severe malnutrition. brain sections from the somestesic, motor, and occipital cortical areas of 13 infants who died of severe malnutrition and 7 eutrophic infants who died of other causes were studied by means of the rapid golgi method. apical dendritic spines from neurons of the fifth cortical layer were studied and counted in all sections. apical dendrites were significantly shorter in malnourished infants than in the control group (581.54 +/- 54.32 microm in severe malnutrition vs 846.3 microm in normal infants). the number of dendritic spines per dendrite was also significantly diminished (185.3 +/- 36.1 in malnourished vs 374.3 +/- 41.6 in eutrophic infants). there were marked morphologic abnormalities in the dendritic spines of infants dying of severe malnutrition that were classified as dysplastic. short apical dendrites, fewer spines, and dendritic spine abnormalities occur in severe infant malnutrition. these anatomic anomalies might be related to the neuropsychological deficits that occur in these children.

video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (vats) has been assuming an expanded role in the management of cardiothoracic disease. as instrumentation and experience increase, vats is being applied to treat smaller patients. we report our experience with 34 low birth weight infants undergoing vats interruption of patent ductus arteriosus (pda). vats allows pda interruption without the muscle cutting or rib spreading of a standard thoracotomy. four small, 3-mm incisions are made along the line of a potential thoracotomy incision. ports placed through these incisions admit endoscopic instruments, a camera, and a vascular clip applier. median age at surgery was 15.5 days (range: 1-44 days). median weight at surgery was 930 g (range: 575-2500 g). twenty patients weighed <1 kg, and 13 weighed <750 g. all patients had congestive heart failure and had either failed indomethacin therapy or had contraindications to indomethacin. median surgical time was 60 minutes (range: 31-171 minutes). echocardiography documented elimination of ductal flow in all patients. operative mortality was zero. four patients (4/34 = 12%) required conversion to open thoracotomy: 1 because of difficult exposure, 1 because of pulmonary dysfunction and anasarca, 1 because of a large 1-cm duct, and 1 because of coagulopathy and poor pulmonary compliance. two patients died before discharge: 1 patient (surgical weight: 605 g) died on postoperative day 2 because of intracranial hemorrhage, and 1 patient (surgical weight: 1725 g) died on postoperative day 88 because of multiple system organ failure. follow-up has demonstrated no pda murmur in any patient, but echocardiography revealed trace ductal flow in 2 patients. vats offers a minimally traumatic, safe, and effective technique for pda interruption in low birth weight neonates and infants.

renovascular disease accounts for the vast majority of cases of infantile hypertension with complications resulting from umbilical arterial catheterization predominating in the neonatal period and fibrodysplastic lesions of the renal artery predominating outside the neonatal period. we report a previously undescribed cause of renovascular hypertension: solitary renal myofibromatosis. a 9-month-old male infant was transported to the intensive care unit at children's hospital in denver, colorado, for evaluation and treatment of a dilated cardiomyopathy and severe systemic hypertension. the child was full-term with no perinatal problems. specifically, the child never required umbilical arterial catheterization. he was well until 6 months of age when his parents noted poor weight gain. at 9 months of age, he was evaluated at the referral hospital for failure to thrive. on examination he was noted to have a blood pressure of 170/110 mm hg, but no other abnormalities. a chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly. laboratory studies demonstrated normal electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine. however, urinalysis demonstrated 4+ protein without red blood cells. an echocardiogram showed severe left ventricular dilatation with an ejection fraction of 16%. on admission the child was noted to be cachectic. his vital signs, including blood pressure, were normal for age. the physical examination was unremarkable. serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine were normal. echocardiographic studies suggested a dilated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. he was started on digoxin and captopril. subsequently, he demonstrated episodic hypertension ranging from 170/90 to 220/130 mm hg. a repeat echocardiogram 24 hours after admission demonstrated a purely hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. verapamil and nifedipine were added to the treatment regimen in an effort to better control the blood pressure without success. urine and blood for catecholamines and plasma renin activity, respectively, were sent and treatment with phentolamine instituted because of a possible pheochromocytoma. a spiral abdominal computerized tomographic scan revealed a markedly abnormal right kidney with linear streaky areas of calcification around the hilum and also an area of nonenhancement in the posterior upper pole. the adrenals and the left kidney were normal. doppler ultrasound revealed a decrease in right renal arterial flow. the urinary catecholamines were normal and surgery was scheduled after the blood pressure was brought under control by medical treatment. at surgery, tumorous tissue and thrombosis of the renal artery were found in the right upper pole. a right nephrectomy was performed. pathologic examination of the kidney showed the presence of a diffuse spindle cell proliferation in the interstitium of the kidney. the angiogenic/angiocentric character of the proliferation was demonstrated in several large renal vessels. the lumen of most vessels was narrowed and some vessels were totally occluded with recanalization and dystrophic calcifications observed. immunostaining of the tumor demonstrated strong desmin and vimentin positivity and minimal actin positivity in the spindle cells. mitotic activity was not noted in the spindle cell process. these pathologic changes were consistent with a diagnosis of infantile myofibromatosis (im). the child's preoperative plasma renin activity was 50 712 ng/dl/h (reference range, 235-3700 ng/dl/h). the causes of systemic hypertension in infancy are many although renal causes are by far the most common. renal arterial stenosis or thrombosis accounts for 10% to 24% of cases of infantile hypertension. renal artery thrombosis is usually a consequence of umbilical arterial catheterization, which can also lead to embolization of the renal artery. renal artery stenosis may result from fibrodysplastic lesions (74%), abdominal aortitis (9%), a complication of renal transplantation (5%), and ren

necrotizing fasciitis (nf) is a predominantly adult disorder, with bacterial infection of the soft tissue. in children, it is relatively rare and has a fulminant course with a high mortality rate. in the neonate, most cases of nf are attributable to secondary infection of omphalitis, balanitis, mammitis, postoperative complications, and fetal monitoring. the objective of this communication is to report 3 cases of neonatal nf and provide a literature review of this disorder. this review yielded 66 cases of neonatal nf. only 3 cases were premature. there was no sex predilection and the condition rarely recurred. several underlying conditions were identified that might have contributed to the development of neonatal nf. these included omphalitis in 47, mammitis in 5, balanitis in 4, fetal scalp monitoring in 2, necrotizing enterocolitis, immunodeficiency, bullous impetigo, and maternal mastitis in 1 patient each. the most common site of the initial involvement was the abdominal wall (n = 53), followed by the thorax (n = 7), back (n = 2), scalp (n = 2), and extremity (n = 2). the initial skin presentation ranged from minimal rash to erythema, edema, induration or cellulitis. the lesions subsequently spread rapidly. the overlying skin might later develop a violaceous discoloration, peau d'orange appearance, bullae, or necrosis. crepitus was uncommon. fever and tachycardia were frequent but not uniformly present. the leukocyte count of the peripheral blood was usually elevated with a shift to the left. thrombocytopenia was noted in half of the cases. hypocalcemia was rarely reported. of the 53 wound cultures available for bacteriologic evaluation, 39 were polymicrobial, 13 were monomicrobial, and 1 was sterile. blood culture was positive in only 20 cases (50%). treatment modalities included the use of antibiotics, supportive care, surgical debridement, and drainage of the affected fascial planes. two of the 6 cases who received hyperbaric oxygen therapy died. the overall mortality rate was 59% (39/66). in 12 cases, skin grafting was required because of poor granulation formation or large postoperative skin defects among the survivors. neonatal nf is an uncommon but often fatal bacterial infection of the skin, subcutaneous fat, superficial fascia, and deep fascia. it is characterized by marked tissue edema, rapid spread of inflammation, and signs of systemic toxicity. the wound cultures are predominantly polymicrobial and the location of initial involvement depends on the underlying etiologic factor. high index of suspicion, prompt aggressive surgery, appropriate antibiotics, and supportive care are the mainstays of management in the newborn infant with nf.

we describe the complex presentation of a patient with renal medullary carcinoma, a newly described entity primarily affecting young patients with sickle cell trait. renal medullary carcinoma is an aggressive, rapidly destructive tumor associated with a delayed diagnosis and a poor outcome. the most common presenting signs and symptoms include hematuria, abdominal or flank pain, and weight loss. sickle cell trait as the sole cause of hematuria in young black patients is a diagnosis of exclusion. hemoglobin electrophoresis, intravenous pyelography, and computed tomography scans should be the minimal studies performed in young black patients with hematuria.

current american academy of pediatrics and united states public health service immunization practices advisory committee recommendations for hepatitis b immunization in premature infants weighing <2 kg at birth born to hepatitis b surface antigen (hbsag)-negative mothers are to delay the initiation of vaccination until such infants reach 2 kg or until 2 months of age. this proposal to delay vaccination at birth in these low-risk infants was based on limited studies not conducted in the united states. we sought to reassess current recommendations to delay administration of hepatitis b vaccine in low-risk premature infants by determining the immunogenicity of early hepatitis b vaccination in a us population and identifying variables associated with poor immunogenicity. a total of 148 infants <37 weeks' gestation born to mothers negative for hbsag were recruited at birth and stratified to three birth weight groups: <1000 g, 1000 to 1500 g, and >1500 g. recombinant hepatitis b vaccine was administered within the first week of life, at 1 to 2 months of age, and at 6 to 7 months of age. serum obtained at birth and after the second and third doses of vaccine was tested for antibody to hbsag. variables associated with poor response were sought prospectively by collecting demographic and clinical data. a total of 118 subjects (83%) completed the study. postsecond dose sera were available for 117 infants and postthird dose sera were available for 112 infants. the seroprotection rate (attaining >/=10 miu/ml hbs antibody) after two doses was low (25%) regardless of birth weight; infants weighing <1000 g at birth had the poorest response (11%). the seroprotection response rate after three doses of vaccine increased with birth weight; infants weighing =1500 g at birth (groups 1 and 2) had lower rates of response (52% and 68%, respectively) than did infants weighing >1500 g at birth (group 3; 84% response rate). the seroprotection response rate of group 3 infants after three doses of vaccine, although low, could not be differentiated from the response rates reported for full-term infants using 95% confidence intervals. of all infants who did not achieve protective levels of antibody after three doses of vaccine, 96% (26/27) weighed <1700 g at birth. the geometric mean hbs antibody levels in responders were 88 and 386 miu/ml after two and three doses, respectively. of 36 children with a birth weight >1500 g, 33 (91%) achieved levels of hbs antibody >100 miu/ml after three doses of vaccine, compared with 25/35 (71%) of infants with birth weight <1500 g. using logistic regression analysis, nonresponders were more likely than were responders to have been treated with steroids (26% vs 9%) and to have had a low birth weight (1037 g vs 1455 g). in addition, the seroresponse rate of black infants was more likely than that of white infants to be associated with poor weight gain (falling off 2 percentile ranks in weight) in the first 6 months of life: 22% of black and 60% of white children who failed to gain weight adequately responded to vaccination, compared with 92% of black and 70% of white children who were growing adequately. of interest, the only infant with a birth weight of >1700 g who did not make protective levels of specific antibody after three doses of vaccine was 2300 g at birth, but had inadequate weight gain in the first 6 months of life. this study supports current recommendations of the american academy of pediatrics and the centers for disease control and prevention for delaying the initiation of hepatitis b immunization beyond the first week of life for premature infants at low risk for hepatitis b infection, particularly in newborns weighing <1700 g at birth. in addition, we have identified variables other than birth weight that were associated with an inadequate immune response to early hepatitis b vaccination in premature infants, such as poor weight gain in the first 6 months of life

vertebral artery compression causing brainstem ischemia has been suggested to underlie the sudden infant death syndrome. vertebral artery distortion from neck movements has been demonstrated by angiography in infants, but direct evidence for arterial compression is lacking. in an attempt to demonstrate vertebral artery compression from head movement, we examined at postmortem the vertebral arteries of infants after neck extension or rotation. the c1-c7 spinal column, together with a 2-cm rim of skull base, was removed from 20 infants dying from sudden infant death syndrome or other causes. in 5 cases the neck was extended, in 9 cases it was rotated 90 degrees to the right, and in 6 cases the neck was held in the neutral position. the neck was maintained in these positions during formalin fixation, and serial sections of selected blocks were examined microscopically. in 3 of 5 extended cases, bilateral vertebral artery compression was seen between the occipital bone and c1. in 3 of 9 rotated cases, the left vertebral artery was compressed adjacent to c1 before the artery entered the transverse foramen. no vertebral artery compression was seen in the necks held in the neutral position. the vertebral arteries of some infants can be compressed by neck movement. this could induce lethal brainstem ischemia in infants with inadequate collateral blood flow or with poor compensatory arterial dilatation, and may underlie some cases of sudden infant death syndrome.

controversy exists regarding the integrity of the nervous system in the newborn with a congenital heart defect who must undergo corrective or palliative open heart surgery. neurodevelopmental sequelae have been primarily attributed to surgical procedures without standardized evaluation of the preoperative neurologic status. to determine whether newborns with congenital heart defects demonstrate abnormalities in neurobehavioral status before surgery. in this prospective study, a standardized neonatal neurobehavioral assessment and a neurologic examination were conducted independently in a consecutive series of 56 neonates referred to our hospital for investigation of open heart surgery. neurobehavioral and neurologic abnormalities were documented in greater than half of the cohort and included hypotonia, hypertonia, jitteriness, motor asymmetries, and absent suck. poor state regulation (62%) and feeding difficulties (34%) also were commonly observed. furthermore, 3 subjects had seizures, 35.7% were microcephalic, and 12.5% were macrocephalic. the overall likelihood of neurobehavioral abnormalities was not enhanced by indicators of cardiorespiratory compromise. interestingly, newborns with acyanotic congenital heart defects were more likely to demonstrate neurologic compromise than were those with cyanotic defects. findings suggest that the prevalence of neurobehavioral abnormalities before surgery in newborns with congenital heart defects has been underappreciated and would indicate that factors other than intraoperative procedures should be considered in the genesis of brain injury in this population.congenital heart defects, neurologic examination, newborn.

the purpose of this article is to determine the effect of community income as a co-factor in the association of low birth weight, race, and maternal nativity in new york city. new york city birth records, 1988 through 1994, provided data on maternal and infant characteristics. there were 274 121 white and 279 826 black mothers included in this study. black mothers were classified as us-born (south and northeast) and foreign-born (the caribbean, south america, and africa). based on the 1990 us census income data, census tracts of the city were aggregated by tertile of per capita income as low-, middle-, and high-income communities. incidence of low birth weight was estimated by race, maternal nativity in the city as a whole, and each income community. overall, black women had a substantially higher risk of low birth weight infants (<2500 g) than did whites (13.1% vs 4.8%). foreign-born black mothers had a birth weight advantage over us-born black mothers (10.0% vs 16.7%). after controlling for socioeconomic and medical characteristics, the risks of low birth weight for blacks compared with whites were 0.95 (95% confidence interval: 0. 87-1.03) and 0.86 (0.69-1.02) for caribbean- and african-born black mothers, respectively. moreover, in low-income communities, compared with white mothers, the risks for caribbean- and african-born black mothers were 0.88 (0.79-0.97) and 0.77 (0.61-0.96), respectively. by contrast, us and south american-born black mothers had a consistently higher risk of low birth weight infants, regardless of community income level. low birth weight was significantly less frequent among whites than among blacks. however, this overall finding masked substantial variation among blacks, determined by maternal nativity and the income level of the community in which they lived. in fact, caribbean- and african-born black mothers had birth outcomes generally similar to and, in poor communities, even more favorable than those for whites.

recent advances in the diagnosis and treatment of inborn errors of metabolism have improved substantially the prognosis for many of these conditions. this makes it essential that the practicing pediatrician be familiar with the clinical presentation of these disorders. a practical clinical approach to the recognition of inborn errors of metabolism in the young infant is presented in this review. indications for specific laboratory studies are discussed. guidelines are provided for the stabilization and emergency treatment of critically ill infants. this approach will identify those infants who will benefit from additional evaluation and specific treatment. many of the inborn errors of metabolism, including urea cycle defects, organic acidemias, and certain disorders of amino acid metabolism, present in the young infant with symptoms of an acute or chronic metabolic encephalopathy. typical symptoms include lethargy, poor feeding, apnea or tachypnea, and recurrent vomiting. metabolic acidosis and/or hyperammonemia are observed in many of these conditions, but there are notable exceptions, including nonketotic hyperglycinemia and molybdenum co-factor deficiency. therefore, appropriate laboratory testing for metabolic disorders should be performed in any infant who exhibits these findings. although sepsis may be the initial consideration in a neonate with these symptoms, inborn errors of metabolism should always be in the differential diagnosis, particularly in a full-term infant with no specific risk factors. hypoglycemia may be the predominant finding in a number of inborn errors of metabolism, including glycogen storage disorders, defects in gluconeogenesis, and fatty acid oxidation defects. the latter disorders, among the most common encountered, exhibit marked clinical variability and also may present as a sudden death, a reye's-like episode, or a cardiomyopathy. jaundice or other evidence of hepatic dysfunction is the mode of presentation of another important group of inborn errors of metabolism including galactosemia, hereditary tyrosinemia, neonatal hemochromatosis, and a number of other conditions. a subset of lysosomal storage disorders may present very early with coarse facial features, organomegaly, or even hydrops fetalis. specific patterns of dysmorphic features and congenital anomalies characterize yet another group of inherited metabolic disorders, such as zellweger syndrome and the smith-lemli-opitz syndrome. each of these symptom complexes, and the appropriate evaluation of the affected infants, is discussed in more detail in this review.

to identify factors associated with depressive symptoms in inner-city mothers of young children. a cross-sectional survey was administered to a convenience sample of english-speaking mothers attending a well-child visit for a child aged 6 months to 3 years in a hospital-based, inner-city, general pediatric clinic. the maternal interview collected data on sociodemographic characteristics, and mothers' health and financial status. mothers completed the psychiatric symptom index (psi), a 29-item checklist shown to have very good validity and reliability in a multicultural population. a total score of >/=20 represents high levels of symptoms; scores >/=30 strongly suggest major depression. two hundred seventy-nine mothers completed the psi. mothers ranged in age from 14 to 48 years (mean, 27 years). seventy-one percent were unmarried; 57% received public assistance. forty-two percent of mothers were hispanic, 40% black, 9% white, and 10% mixed or other races. forty-eight percent were foreign-born. twenty-four percent reported having a medical condition; 6% had activity limitation because of illness. the mean psi score was 19; 18% of mothers had a psi score >/=30 and 39% scored >/=20. psi scores did not vary by age, race, birthplace, educational level, employment, marital status, or family composition. psi scores were higher for mothers receiving public assistance (21 vs 17), with self-reports of poor or fair financial status (22 vs 15) and poor health status (52 vs 17). mothers with activity limitations because of illness had significantly higher psi scores (34 vs 18). multiple regression analyses confirmed the independent relationships of these maternal characteristics to high psi scores. depressive symptoms in inner-city mothers of young children are common. in this population of women with many risk factors, traditional sociodemographic risk factors did not successfully identify those who are depressed. however, mothers' self-reports of poor financial status, health status, or activity limitation because of illness were associated with higher levels of depressive symptoms. these findings may assist clinicians in distinguishing which mothers are likely to be depressed when almost all are at high risk.

growing evidence suggests that structural and functional brain reserves, thought to develop in childhood and adolescence, may be crucial in determining when cognitive impairment begins. the purpose of this report is to examine the relationship of height, as a marker of childhood development, to late-life cognitive function in a sample of elderly japanese-american men. cognitive performance was assessed from 1991 to 1993 in the honolulu-asia aging study in 3733 men aged 71 to 93 years and related to height that was measured 25 years earlier. among the study sample, shorter men were older, leaner, and less educated than taller men. shorter men also spent more years of their childhood living in japan and were more likely to have had fathers in unskilled professions. after adjustment for age, the prevalence of poor cognitive performance declined consistently with increasing height from 25% in men shorter than 154 cm (61 in) to 9% in those taller than 174 cm (69 in). excluding men with stroke or dementia did not alter the association between height and cognitive performance. apolipoprotein e4 was unrelated to height and did not effect the association between height and cognitive function. the prevalence of alzheimer's disease was higher in men who were 154 cm (61 in) or shorter as compared with men who were taller (4.7% vs 2.9%, respectively). there was no association between height and vascular dementia. efforts to improve prenatal and early life conditions to maximize growth in childhood and adolescence could diminish or delay the expression of cognitive impairments that occur later in life. prevention of some late-life cognitive impairments may have pediatric origins.

previous studies of homeless children have described more health problems and service use than in housed children, but failed to control for potential confounding factors that may differ between these children. this observational study examines the relationship of homelessness and other determinants to health status and service use patterns in 627 homeless and low-income housed children. case-control study of 293 homeless and 334 low-income housed children aged 3 months to 17 years and their mothers conducted in worcester, massachusetts. information was collected about mothers' housing history, income, education, emotional distress, and victimization history. standardized instruments were administered to assess children's health. health service use questions were adapted from national surveys. main outcome measures included health status, acute illness morbidity, emergency department and outpatient medical visits. multivariable regression analyses were used to examine the association of family and environmental determinants, including homelessness, with health status and service use outcomes. mothers of homeless children were more likely to report their children as being in fair or poor health compared with their housed counterparts. homeless children were reported to experience a higher number of acute illness symptoms, including fever, ear infection, diarrhea, and asthma. emergency department and outpatient medical visits were higher among the homeless group. after controlling for potential explanatory factors, homeless children remained more likely to experience fair or poor health status (adjusted odds ratio [or] = 2.83; 95% confidence interval [ci], 1.16, 4.87), and a higher frequency of outpatient (or = 1.71; 95% ci, 1.18, 2.48) and emergency department visits (or = 1.21; 95% ci, 0.83, 1.74). mothers' emotional distress was independently associated with acute illness symptoms and frequent use of outpatient and emergency department settings. homelessness is an independent predictor of poor health status and high service use among children. the present findings highlight the importance of preventive interventions and efforts to increase access to primary care among homeless children.

to present an epidemiologic profile of children with special health care needs using a new definition of the population developed by the federal maternal and child health bureau. we operationalized the new definition using the recently released 1994 national health interview survey on disability. estimates are based on 30 032 completed interviews for children <18 years old. the overall response rate was 87%. eighteen percent of us children <18 years old in 1994, or 12.6 million children nationally, had a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition and required health and related services of a type or amount beyond that required by children generally. this estimate includes children with existing special health care needs but excludes the at-risk population. prevalence was higher for older children, boys, african-americans, and children from low-income and single-parent households. children with existing special health care needs had three times as many bed days and school absence days as other children. an estimated 11% of children with existing special health care needs were uninsured, 6% were without a usual source of health care, 18% were reported as dissatisfied with one or more aspects of care received at their usual source of care, and 13% had one or more unmet health needs in the past year. a substantial minority of us children were identified as having an existing special health care need using national survey data. children with existing special health care needs are disproportionately poor and socially disadvantaged. moreover, many of these children face significant barriers to health care.

transient hypothyroxinemia (th) of prematurity has been correlated with poor neurodevelopmental outcome. however, the relationship between thyroid function and neonatal mortality and brain injury has not been described. to investigate the relationship between thyroid function and neonatal outcome. review of infants weighing <1500 grams admitted to a single level iii newborn intensive care unit (n = 342). serum total t4 values of initial newborn screening of infants dying before hospital discharge were compared with those of surviving infants. total t4 values from infants with and without intraventricular hemorrhage (ivh) and periventricular leukomalacia (pvl) also were compared. t4 values strongly correlated with gestational age (r = .56). overall, 289 (85%) of 342 infants had th. none of the infants had true congenital hypothyroidism. t4 values of infants with cystic pvl (n = 15) were not statistically different from those for infants who did not develop cystic pvl. infants with ivh (n = 58) had a lower t4 value than did infants who did not develop ivh (5.4 +/- 3.4 microg/dl vs 7.8 +/- 3.6 microg/dl). infants who died before hospital discharge (n = 24) had a lower t4 value than did infants discharged to home (3.4 +/- 2.2 vs 7.9 +/- 3.7 microg/dl). after controlling for potential confounding variables, t4 value remained associated with an increased odds of ivh (odds ratio: 1.2; 95% confidence interval: 1.05 to 1.4) and mortality (odds ratio: 2.3; 95% confidence interval 1.6 to 3.4). in our population of very low birth weight infants, th has an incidence of 85%. very low t4 values on initial newborn screening are associated with increased odds of death and ivh. additional investigation is needed to determine whether low serum thyroxine level contributes to ivh and neonatal death or whether it is simply an associated factor.

the increasing complexity of medical care and a desire to increase quality and control costs have led to growing use of clinical practice guidelines (cpgs). it is unclear how helpful these guidelines are to the practitioners expected to use them. we surveyed pediatricians about their knowledge and impressions of four well-publicized cpgs: the american academy of pediatrics' "practice parameter for hyperbilirubinemia in newborns" (hyperbilirubinemia), "a guideline for the management of febrile infants" (fever), the agency for health care policy and research's "guideline for otitis media with effusion" (otitis), and the us preventive services task force guide to clinical preventive services (preventive care). 1) what percentage of practicing pediatricians are aware of these guidelines? 2) how helpful do they find them? 3) what are practitioners' perceived limitations of these guidelines? 4) have these guidelines affected provider behavior? 5) are there features of a provider's training or practice that are associated with changing practice as a result of guidelines? a national survey of 600 pediatricians selected at random from the american medical association master file. a total of 300 of 555 eligible participants (54%) returned surveys. of the respondents, 66% were aware of the hyperbilirubinemia guideline, 64% of the fever guideline, 50% of the otitis guideline, but only 16% knew of the preventive care guidelines. mean helpfulness scores (1 to 10 scale, where 1 = "not at all helpful" and 10 = "extremely helpful") ranged from 3.67 to 6.67 for the different guidelines. in terms of limitations, 15% to 33% of respondents reported that cpgs were "too cookbook," 6% to 19% reported that they were "too time-consuming," and 4% to 16% reported that they were "too cumbersome." additional reported limitations were believing that a guideline left no room for personal experience and judgment, concern of increased liability risk, and poor parental acceptance of cpg recommendations. the proportions reporting change in management as a result of a cpg were 28% for the hyperbilirubinemia guideline, 36% for the fever guideline, 19% for the preventive care guidelines, and 28% for the otitis guideline. mean helpfulness scores reported by nonuniversity-affiliated physicians were significantly higher than those reported by university-affiliated physicians. in a regression model of respondents aware of a particular guideline, more recent graduation from medical school and increased helpfulness scores were associated with guideline-related behavior change. in their present form, cpgs are not perceived as very helpful by most practitioners. more recent medical school graduates and nonuniversity-affiliated physicians are more likely to find them helpful and more likely to change their behavior because of them.

we performed a questionnaire survey about 42 patients with crigler-najjar syndrome type 1 who were currently alive. information was obtained on their age, sex, birth weight, gestation, parental consanguinity, other family members affected, age of onset of jaundice, neonatal and postneonatal bilirubin values, neonatal and postneonatal therapy, problems faced with phototherapy, liver transplantation, current growth status, current neurologic status, and the status of hearing. patients were between 2 months and 21 years of age. there were 18 males and 24 females. thirty-nine patients had been born at full term gestation and 3 had been preterm. jaundice was noted on postnatal day 1 in 34%, between days 2 and 4 in 55%, and after day 11 of life in 11% of patients. in the neonatal period bilirubin values (mean +/- sd) were typically 19.8 +/- 4.5 mg/dl. eighty-six percent of patients had neonatal peak bilirubin values of >20 mg/dl. parental consanguinity was present in 44% and a history of gilbert's disease in one parent was present in 10% of patients. causes of exacerbations of jaundice reported were respiratory infections, febrile illnesses, vaccinations, fasting, surgery, emotional stress, and noncompliance with treatment. neonatal therapy consisted of exchange transfusion in 28%, phototherapy in 79%, phenobarbitone in 20%, and cholestyramine, albumin, infusions, and plasmapheresis in one case each. the mainstay of postneonatal therapy was home phototherapy for 10 to 16 hours, primarily at night during sleep, using blue lights or a combination of blue and fluorescent lights. some patients used innovatively designed phototherapy units. problems reported with phototherapy were decreased effectiveness with age, poor compliance, restriction of activity and play, inability to travel or take vacations, irritation from eye shades, difficulty keeping eye protection on, difficulties in temperature maintenance, tanning of the skin, embarrassment from the need to be nearly nude during phototherapy, and difficulty in procuring phototherapy lamps. other therapies that had been tried included oral agar, albumin infusions, antioxidants, acupuncture, bilirubin oxidase, calcium infusions, clofibrate, cruciferous vegetables, cholestyramine, chlorpromazine, flumecinol, plasmapheresis, tin mesoporphyrin, ursodeoxycholic acid, and urinary alkalinization. fifteen children had undergone liver transplantation (5 auxiliary and 10 orthotopic). all 42 patients are reportedly of normal height and weight. neurodevelopmental status is said to be normal in 77% of patients. two patients have kernicterus, 4 have cerebellar symptoms, and 1 each has developmental delay, mild intention tremor, and mild speech delay. hearing was reported to be normal in 94% of patients. the 2 children with hearing loss have conductive loss from otitis media. with home phototherapy prolonged, survival free of neurologic deficits is possible in crigler-najjar syndrome type 1, but there are many problems associated with phototherapy. avoiding exacerbations of jaundice is an important aspect of management. liver transplantation offers the prospect of cure but its risk versus benefit ratio is undetermined. hearing loss was absent in the patients surveyed despite prolonged exposure to high bilirubin levels, which suggests that bilirubin may not be as ototoxic as is commonly believed.

parents may be deterred from obtaining commercial oral rehydration solutions (ors) for their young children with acute diarrheal disease because of its availability and/or cost, especially if they are poor. we conducted a randomized clinical trial to determine 1) whether low-income parents could safely mix and administer cereal-based ors (cbors) both from ingredients commonly found in the home and from a premixed packet; 2) whether these cbors were as effective in maintaining hydration as commercial glucose-based ors; and 3) whether cbors were more effective in reducing severity and duration of illness. children 4 to 36 months of age discharged from emergency departments and health centers with acute diarrheal disease were randomized to receive either homemade cbors, reconstituted packet cbors, or pedialyte. a study nurse saw the child at home each day until the illness resolved, and obtained capillary blood for serum sodium at enrollment and at 24 to 48 hours; a sample of cbors for sodium concentration; stool for pathogen analysis; and daily fluid intake, stool frequency, and weight. a total of 232 children were enrolled, of whom 203 (88%) completed the study. two parents (3%) in the homemade cbors group and one parent (1%) in the packet cbors group made mixing errors resulting in a high sodium concentration (>100 meq/l); their children refused the solution and had normal serum sodium values. mean cbors sodium concentration for the remainder of the homemade cbors group was 60 +/- 10 meq/l, and for the packet cbors group, 54 +/- 13. eighteen children (11%) had abnormal serum sodium values at presentation, which returned to normal in all groups in most cases. three children (4.5%) in the homemade cbors group, 4 (6%) in the packet cbors group, and 1 child (1.4%) in the pedialyte group failed therapy. children refused to take homemade cbors and packet cbors (43% and 32%, respectively) more often than pedialyte (9%), and those in the cbors groups tended to take less ors and total fluids. there were no significant differences among the three groups in incidence of daily vomiting or stooling, duration of diarrhea, or weight gain. cbors do not offer a clinically significant advantage over glucose-based ors. homemade cbors represent a treatment option in carefully selected cases, but it is not the safest alternative for regular clinical use.

to determine the outcome of finnish children and adolescents with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (idcm) and factors that might be useful as prognostic indicators. the clinical profile and course of 62 finnish children and adolescents (median age, 13 months; range, 1 day to 20 years) with idcm in 1980 to 1991 were evaluated to detect factors that might predict outcome. factors studied included age, gender, family history, previous viral illness, and symptoms and signs at presentation. furthermore, data on serial electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, and chest x-ray examinations, histologic findings, and treatments were analyzed. during a mean (+/-sd) follow-up of 3.9 +/- 4.5 years (range, 1 day to 25 years), 10 patients (16%) recovered, 17 (27%) had residual disease, 4 (6.4%) underwent heart transplantation, and 31 (50%) died. infants (<1 year of age) and adolescent (>/=15 years of age) male patients with progressing symptoms of left ventricular failure after initiation of medical therapy tended to have the poorest outcome. however, in multivariate analysis, only histologic evidence of endocardial fibroelastosis, clinical signs of right ventricular failure at presentation, and the need for anticoagulative therapy during follow-up, the last an expression of a severely impaired left ventricular systolic function, appeared to be significant predictors of long-term outcome. our study confirms that the outcome of children with idcm still remains poor. however, a group of patients, mainly infants, make a full recovery. adolescent male patients as well as infants suffering from endocardial fibroelastosis with persisting symptoms of congestive heart failure after initiation of medical therapy tend to have the poorest outcome. these patients need a careful follow-up at short time intervals and, in the case of lacking response to medical treatment with resulting growth failure and/or poor quality of life, should be offered urgent heart transplantation.

the purpose of the study was to examine medication use reported by families participating in an urban school-based community intervention program and to relate this use to other social and medical variables. the design of the study was a cross-sectional questionnaire survey. patients and their families recruited from elementary schools in a community setting were interviewed between december 1991 and january 1992. a total of 508 children with asthma were identified by school health records and teacher surveys. their families confirmed the diagnosis and agreed to enter the study. questionnaires were completed by 392 families. the 392 families participated in a controlled trial of asthma education after providing the data that are the basis of this report. more than half of the children took two or more medications for asthma. thirty-one percent took theophylline alone or in combination with an adrenergic agent; 11% took some form of daily antiinflammatory medication, either cromolyn (8%) or inhaled steroids (3%). the pattern of medication use related to measures of severity and to regular visits to physicians or nurses. in general, however, children were undermedicated. a total of 78 children (20%) reported no medication or over-the-counter medication use, although 37% reported asthma severe enough to be associated with >/=20 days of school missed per month, and 37% had had an emergency room visit for asthma in the past 6 months. more than half of children >/=9 years old supervised their own medication. we concluded that undermedication is common in poor children with asthma living in urban areas. antiinflammatory medications are used less commonly than in the general population, and theophylline is used more often. school children may be likely to supervise their own medication.

to assess whether small elevations in blood lead level were associated with measurable behavioral changes in a group of poor children between 1 and 3 years old. the study population consisted of children presenting for routine well-child care to the pediatric clinic at bellevue hospital center, a large urban public hospital. the following inclusion criteria were used for entry into the study: age 12 to 36 months; capillary lead screening result <1.21 micromol/l (25 microg/dl); no known prior history either of blood lead level >1.21 micromol/l (25 microg/dl) or lead exposure requiring chelation therapy; latino or african-american; english or spanish spoken in the home; biological mother as primary caretaker; child not presently attending day care; full-term, singleton gestation; birth weight at least 2500 g; no known neurologic or developmental disorder; and no severe chronic disease, including human immunodeficiency virus infection. study enrollment was simultaneously stratified by capillary lead level and age. all children between 12 and 36 months attending the pediatric clinic during the study period received screening capillary blood measures of lead level following the recommendations of the centers for disease control and prevention and the american academy of pediatrics as part of routine primary care. during periods of enrollment, consecutive lead measurements performed in the pediatric clinic were reviewed by one of the researchers. for those children meeting entry criteria based on lead level and age, further eligibility based on the remainder of the inclusion criteria was determined through parental interview and review of the medical record. lead exposure was assessed with a single capillary blood specimen, using atomic absorption spectrophotometry. subjects were considered to be lead-exposed if their lead level was between 0.48 and 1.20 micromol/l (10 and 24.9 microg/dl) and nonexposed if their lead level was between 0 and 0.48 micromol/l (0 and 9.9 microg/dl). behavior was assessed using the behavior rating scale (brs) of the bayley scales of infant development, second edition. the brs in this age group consists of three components: an emotional regulation factor that measures hyperactive/distractible/easy-frustration behaviors; an orientation-engagement factor that measures fear/withdrawal/disinterest behaviors; and a motor quality factor that assesses the appropriateness of movement and tone. the brs is scored as a percentile; lower scores reflect more problematic behaviors. researchers performing the brs were blinded to capillary lead results. information was collected concerning factors that might confound the relationship between lead and behavior. demographic factors were collected, including: child's age, gender, and country of origin; mother's age, marital status, parity, country of origin, and primary language spoken; parental education, and occupation and receipt of public assistance. socioeconomic status was determined using the hollingshead two-factor index of social position. maternal verbal iq was assessed using the peabody picture vocabulary test-revised. maternal depression was assessed using the center for epidemiologic studies-depression scale. cognitive stimulation provided in the home was assessed using a new office-based instrument, the stimq, which measures the quantity and quality of play materials and parent-toddler activities in the child's home. to assess the child for iron deficiency, we performed a hematocrit and mean corpuscular volume at the time of the capillary lead evaluation. a presumptive diagnosis of iron deficiency was made if the child was either anemic (defined as a hematocrit <32) or had a mean corpuscular volume <72. the study sample consisted of 72 children. children in the lead-exposed group (n = 41) had a mean brs behavior score that was 15.8 points lower than that of children in the nonexposed group (n = 31), which was significant by the stu

despite the widespread use of 24-hour intraesophageal ph monitoring for evaluation of gastroesophageal reflux in infants and children, there is little published information regarding the reproducibility of ambulatory ph studies in this patient population. the purpose of our study was to evaluate the reproducibility of 24-hour intraesophageal ph monitoring in pediatric patients. we prospectively investigated 26 patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroesophageal reflux (14 females and 12 males) ranging in age from 1 month to 18 years (mean, 9.2 years). the patients underwent extended intraesophageal ph monitoring over two consecutive 24-hour periods. data analysis revealed that the overall reproducibility of ambulatory 24-hour ph monitoring is only 69% (r = 0.32). eight of 26 patients had conflicting results on day 1 compared with results on day 2. of the 8 patients with conflicting results on day 1 versus day 2, 5 had normal studies on day 1, but demonstrated pathologic reflux on day 2. thus, the false-negative rate for day 1 was 19.2%. the kappa statistic calculated for the total time the ph was abnormal was 0.32, with values < 0.4 representing poor correlation. spearman correlation coefficients indicated that the percentage of time with ph < 4 (r = 0.64) and the number of reflux episodes (r = 0.71) per 24-hour period are the most reproducible ph parameters. the reproducibility of 24-hour intraesophageal ph monitoring in the pediatric population is suboptimal. the investigation should be extended or repeated if the result does not correlate with the patient's clinical history.

social capital describes the benefits that are derived from personal social relationships (within families and communities) and social affiliations. this investigation examined the extent to which social capital is associated with positive developmental and behavioral outcomes in high-risk preschool children. a cross-sectional case-control analysis of young children "doing well" and "not doing well" at baseline in four coordinated longitudinal studies. a total of 667 2- to 5-year-old children (mean age, 4.4 years) and their maternal caregivers who are participating in the longitudinal studies of child abuse and neglect consortium. at recruitment, all children were characterized by unfavorable social or economic circumstances that contributed to the identification of the children as high risk. social capital was defined as benefits that accrue from social relationships within communities and families. a social capital index was created by assigning one point to each of the following indicators: 1) two parents or parent-figures in the home; 2) social support of the maternal caregiver; 3) no more than two children in the family; 4) neighborhood support; and 5) regular church attendance. outcomes were measured with the child behavior checklist, a widely used measure of behavioral/emotional problems, and with the battelle developmental inventory screening test, a standardized test that identifies developmental deficits. children were classified as doing well if their scores on these instruments indicated neither behavioral nor developmental problems. only 13% of the children were classified as doing well. the individual indicators that best discriminated between levels of child functioning were the most direct measures of social capital-church affiliation, perception of personal social support, and support within the neighborhood. the social capital index was strongly associated with child well-being, more so than any single indicator. the presence of any social capital indicator increased the odds of doing well by 29%; adding any two increased the odds of doing well by 66%. our findings suggest that social capital may have an impact on children's well-being as early as the preschool years. in these years it seems to be the parents' social capital that confers benefits on their offspring, just as children benefit from their parents' financial and human capital. social capital may be most crucial for families who have fewer financial and educational resources. our findings suggest that those interested in the healthy development of children, particularly children most at risk for poor developmental outcomes, must search for new and creative ways of supporting interpersonal relationships and strengthening the communities in which families carry out the daily activities of their lives.

to identify reasons for inconsistent contraceptive use that antedate conception and continue to predispose participants in adolescent-oriented maternity programs to unsafe sexual practices after delivery. we hypothesized that teens who attributed their failure to use contraceptives before their first conception exclusively to concerns about their side effects and/or their own lack of motivation to prevent conception would report less consistent contraceptive use and more repeat conceptions than would teens who attributed their previous failure to use contraceptives to their lack of capacity to do so. we conducted a 2-year, prospective, longitudinal study of contraceptive use and repeat conceptions in a racially/ethnically diverse population of poor 13- to 18-year-olds. the 198 study participants were enrolled consecutively during their first pregnancies from an adolescent-oriented maternity program. the majority (84%) of the teens attributed their failure to use contraceptives before their first pregnancy partially to a lack of capacity to do so. as hypothesized, these teen mothers were significantly more likely to use hormonal contraceptives (85% vs 62%), (particularly norplant, 47% vs 19%) and less likely to conceive again (13% vs 41%). most teens attributed their inconsistent contraceptive use during the postpartum study period to three factors: side effects, plans to abstain from sexual intercourse, and their lack of motivation to postpone additional childbearing. the reasons teen mothers give for not using contraceptives consistently before their first pregnancies predict the occurrence of subsequent conceptions during adolescence. those who attribute their previous failure to use contraceptives consistently to side-effect concerns and their own lack of motivation to postpone childbearing are least likely to use hormonal contraceptives after delivery and most likely to conceive again. our findings suggest that future research should focus on the development of more effective interventions for preventing repeat conceptions among adolescent mothers who had the capacity to prevent their first pregnancies.

results from a recent series of surveys from 9 states and the district of columbia by the community childhood hunger identification project (cchip) provide an estimate that 4 million american children experience prolonged periodic food insufficiency and hunger each year, 8% of the children under the age of 12 in this country. the same studies show that an additional 10 million children are at risk for hunger. the current study examined the relationship between hunger as defined by the cchip measure (food insufficiency attributable to constrained resources) and variables reflecting the psychosocial functioning of low-income, school-aged children. the study group included 328 parents and children from a cchip study of families with at least 1 child under the age of 12 years living in the city of pittsburgh and the surrounding allegheny county. a two-stage area probability sampling design with standard cluster techniques was used. all parents whose child was between the ages of 6 and 12 years at the time of interview were asked to complete a pediatric symptom checklist, a brief parent-report questionnaire that assesses children's emotional and behavioral symptoms. hunger status was defined by parent responses to the standard 8 food-insufficiency questions from the cchip survey that are used to classify households and children as "hungry," "at-risk for hunger," or "not hungry." in an area probability sample of low-income families, those defined as hungry on the cchip measure were significantly more likely to have clinical levels of psychosocial dysfunction on the pediatric symptom checklist than children defined as at-risk for hunger or not hungry. analysis of individual items and factor scores on the pediatric symptom checklist showed that virtually all behavioral, emotional, and academic problems were more prevalent in hungry children, but that aggression and anxiety had the strongest degree of association with experiences of hunger. children from families that report multiple experiences of food insufficiency and hunger are more likely to show behavioral, emotional, and academic problems on a standardized measure of psychosocial dysfunction than children from the same low-income communities whose families do not report experiences of hunger. although causality cannot be determined from a cross-sectional design, the strength of these findings suggests the importance of greater awareness on the part of health care providers and public health officials of the role of food insufficiency and hunger in the lives of poor children.

to determine the most effective strategy to encourage adherence with tuberculosis test reading in a high-risk population. design. prospective randomized controlled trial. consecutive sample of 627 children ages 1 to 12 years due for a tuberculosis (tb) test in an urban children's hospital outpatient department. one child per family was enrolled. all families received education regarding the importance of skin testing for tb and the need for follow-up, and written and verbal instructions regarding test reading. families were randomly assigned to one of five strategies for follow-up tb test reading at 48 to 72 hours: 1) routine verbal and written instructions, 2) reminder phone call, 3) transportation tokens and toy on return, 4) withholding of school forms until time of reading and need to repeat tb test if not timely read, 5) parents taught to read induration with nurse home visit. those who did not have tests read at 48 to 72 hours by a trained professional were phoned 1 week later. the five groups did not differ with regard to tb risk factor score, maternal education, transportation source, or perceived importance of tb testing. before the study the follow-up rate of tb test reading by a trained professional was 45%. reading rates in this study were 58%, 70%, 67%, 70%, and 72% for groups 1 to 5, respectively. in group 4, only 39% had school forms to be completed and their adherence rate was 84% (53/63). compared to group 1, the only statistically significant improvement was in group 4, especially for those who needed school forms completed, and in group 5. those not adhering in groups 1 to 4 did not differ from returnees with regard to tb risk factors, maternal education, transportation, or perceived importance of testing. the most common reasons for failing to return included forgetfulness, transportation, and time constraints. group 5 was stopped early because of difficulty with nurse visits (n = 98). when told of the nurse visit, 9% (9/98) families could not find a time for the visit. seventeen percent (17/98) were visited but the child was not home, and 7% (7/98) were not visited because of a nurse scheduling problem. in a high-risk population, adherence with tb test reading is poor. however, education and return of school forms at reading time can significantly improve adherence. although requiring larger investment in resources, visiting nurses may also aid in test reading.

to determine the validity and reliability of various clinical findings in the diagnosis of dehydration in children. prospective cohort study. an urban pediatric hospital emergency department. one hundred eighty-six children ranging in age from 1 month to 5 years old with diarrhea, vomiting, or poor oral fluid intake, either admitted or followed as outpatients. exclusion criteria included malnutrition, recent prior therapy at another facility, symptoms for longer than 5 days' duration, and hyponatremia or hypernatremia. all children were evaluated for 10 clinical signs before treatment. the diagnostic standard for dehydration was fluid deficit as determined from serial weight gain after treatment. sixty-three children (34%) had dehydration, defined as a deficit of 5% or more of body weight. at this deficit, clinical signs were already apparent (median = 5). individual findings had generally low sensitivity and high specificity, although parent report of decreased urine output was sensitive but not specific. the presence of any three or more signs had a sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 82% for detecting a deficit of 5% or more. a subset of four factors-capillary refill >2 seconds, absent tears, dry mucous membranes, and ill general appearance-predicted dehydration as well as the entire set, with the presence of any two or more of these signs indicating a deficit of at least 5%. interobserver reliability was good to excellent for all but one of the findings studied (quality of respirations). conventionally used clinical signs of dehydration are valid and reliable; however, individual findings lack sensitivity. diagnosis of clinically important dehydration should be based on the presence of at least three clinical findings.

predictive efforts using individual factors or scoring systems do not adequately identify all intact survivors, and therefore all drowning victims are aggressively resuscitated in most emergency departments. more reliable outcome prediction is needed to guide early treatment decisions. the charts of 274 near drowning patients admitted to loma linda university children's hospital were retrospectively reviewed. patient outcome was categorized into good (near normal function), and poor (vegetative or dead) categories. discriminant analysis was used to identify combinations of variables most able to predict outcome and a clinical classification system was constructed. the acute care hospital costs for each group were compared. discriminant analysis classification achieved 95% accuracy, predicting death in 6 intact survivors. no combination of variables could accurately separate all intact survivors from the vegetative and dead groups. the clinical classification method achieved 93% overall accuracy, predicting death in 5 intact survivors. of patients predicted to have a poor outcome, 5 (6.3%) survived intact. children may experience an unpredictable, prolonged vegetative state followed by full recovery. vegetative patients are the most expensive to care for (consuming 53% of total costs) while intact survivors are the least expensive. the majority of costs were spent on patients with poor outcome. individual outcome cannot be reliably predicted in the emergency department; therefore, aggressive resuscitation of near drowning victims should be performed. decisions to subsequently withdraw life support should be made based on integration of likelihood of survival, high (but not absolute) certainty, and parental/societal issues. the vegetative patients are the most expensive to care for, while intact survivors are least expensive. reduction of expenditures on patients likely to have vegetative or dead outcome would result in substantial savings, but loss of normal survivors.

in patients with diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, when empiric therapy or less-invasive diagnostic procedures fail, physicians frequently resort to open lung biopsy (olb) to provide a definite diagnosis and to help redirect therapeutic treatment. olb is still widely regarded as a safe diagnostic procedure, even in the critically ill child. the objective of this study is to evaluate the accuracy of this view with regard to children with acute respiratory failure (arf) and, for this purpose, compares the mortality and morbidity of such patients with those without arf. retrospective chart review. university hospital. forty-two patients (mean age, 6.6 years) underwent 47 olbs for undiagnosed diffuse pulmonary infiltrates between july 1984 and december 1994. twenty-six patients (55%) were in arf. fifteen of these patients were intubated and receiving mechanical ventilatory support before the olb procedure. the overall incidence of serious complications associated with the olb procedure was 51%. of the patients with arf, 17 (65%) had at least one major complication compared with 3 (14%) of the patients without arf. pleural air complications (62% of the total) occurred only in patients with arf: pneumothoraces and/or prolonged air leaks developed in 10 (38%) after their olbs; 9 of these patients died, and 7 had pneumothorax complicating their chest tube removal, which required replacement chest tubes. all patients with arf preoperatively required prolonged ventilatory support after the olb procedure, whereas 90% of the patients without arf could be extubated within 24 hours. overall, 10 patients (24%) died after the olb procedure. all deaths occurred in patients with arf. both arf preoperatively and the presence of postoperative complications were significantly associated with decreased survival. the morbidity and mortality rates of children with arf undergoing olb for diffuse pulmonary infiltrates differ considerably from those of children without arf. for children with arf, olb is associated with the risk of prolonged ventilatory support, recurrent pneumothoraces, and air leaks. these complications may be attributable to such patients' having diseased lungs with poor healing. moreover, these complications may, in turn, contribute to the patients' poor outcomes.

to describe the long-term outcome of very low birth weight infants growing up in poor socioeconomic conditions in soweto, south africa. a stratified sample of infants weighing < 1500 g surviving to hospital discharge was enrolled. group 1 consisted of 49 infants 1000 to 1499 g who required mechanical ventilation; group 2 consisted of 39 infants 1000 to 1499 g who did not require mechanical ventilation; and group 3 consisted of 25 infants < 1000 g (such infants are not routinely ventilated). growth and neurological status were recorded at follow-up visits at 3, 6, and 12 months' corrected age and the infants were evaluated further using the bayley scales of infant development between 12 and 18 months. fifteen infants died during the period between hospital discharge and 1 year corrected age, and 12 others were lost to follow-up. although some catch-up growth was noted in the early months, all group means for weight and length were below the 25th percentile at 1 year. cerebral palsy was diagnosed in nine infants (8 from group 1). periventricular leukomalacia and/or porencephaly was diagnosed in eight of the nine infants during their initial hospital stay and was also the strongest negative predictor of the bayley scores. higher maternal education and better intrauterine growth were associated with higher bayley scores. mortality after hospital discharge in this study cohort was extremely high. however, despite marked differences in socioeconomic conditions and tertiary care facilities, the handicap rates were comparable with recent studies from developed countries, and some of the predictors of handicap, eg, periventricular leukomalacia and porencephaly, were also similar.

to evaluate the effect of megestrol acetate on weight gain and linear growth in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children with growth failure. all human immunodeficiency virus-infected children with growth failure treated with megestrol acetate at our institution were evaluated retrospectively. weight, height, and weight:height ratio were documented from 6 months before initiation of megestrol acetate until 6 months after treatment was discontinued. measurements were corrected for age and sex by conversion to z-scores. incremental growth was determined before, during, and after treatment. the potential effects of cd4+ t-lymphocyte count and percentage, antiretroviral therapy, and intercurrent illnesses on growth were evaluated. nineteen patients were treated with a total of 27 courses of megestrol acetate. the median duration of therapy was 7 months (range, 3 to 11 months), and the median megestrol acetate dose was 7.91 mg/kg/day (range, 4.06 to 8.56 mg/kg/day). from 6 months and 3 months before treatment to the onset of therapy, median changes in weight z-scores were -.27 and -.15, respectively. during megestrol acetate treatment, median changes in weight z-scores were +.29 after 1 month of therapy, +.40 after 3 months, and +.57 after 6 months. after megestrol acetate therapy was discontinued, poor weight gain and weight loss resumed. median 6-month growth velocities for weight were less than the 10th percentile before megestrol acetate, greater than the 97th percentile during treatment, and less than the 3rd percentile after treatment was discontinued. megestrol acetate therapy was not associated with changes in linear growth. antiretroviral therapy, cd4+ t-lymphocyte count or percentage, or intercurrent illnesses were not associated with statistically significant differences in response to megestrol acetate therapy. megestrol acetate treatment of growth failure in pediatric human immunodeficiency virus disease is associated with weight gain, without affecting linear growth.

histoacryl blue (hab), a tissue adhesive, has been shown to decrease laceration repair time, cause less pain to the child, eliminate the need for suture removal, and result in a similar short-term cosmetic outcome compared with conventional suturing. reports suggest that poor correlation can exist between the short-term and long-term cosmetic outcomes for lacerations repaired by conventional suturing. therefore, this study compares the long-term cosmetic outcome of hab to conventional suturing for laceration repair in children. prospective, randomized clinical trial. children presenting an urban pediatric emergency department for laceration repair between october 1994 and february 1995 were eligible. patients less than 1 or more than 18 years old, those with lacerations more than 5 cm in length, or in areas of high tension or mobility were excluded. after routine wound management, including subcutaneous closure when deemed necessary, patients were randomized to receive skin sutures or hab for cutaneous closure. photographs taken at the 2-month and 1-year follow-up visits were evaluated for cosmetic appearance by two plastic surgeons blinded to the method of repair. sixty-one children were enrolled: hab (n = 30), suture (n = 31). thirty hab and 25 sutured patients were assessed at 2 months, while 17 hab and 15 sutured patients were reevaluated at 1 year. patients that followed-up at 2 months and 1 year were comparable to those with no follow-up in: treatment group (hab vs suture), demographics, wound characteristics, and initial parental satisfaction. the two plastic surgeons graded the cosmetic appearance of the wounds repaired by hab to be comparable to those repaired by conventional suturing at both the 2-month and 1-year follow-up. the use of hab is an ideal alternative to conventional suturing for the cutaneous closure of low tension lacerations in children with a long-term cosmetic outcome comparable to conventional suturing.

the objective of this investigation was to determine if high-frequency jet ventilation (hfjv) used early in the treatment of premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome was effective in reducing pulmonary morbidity without increasing the occurrence of adverse neurologic outcomes. a total of 73 premature infants who met the inclusion criteria (gestational age of less than 33 weeks, birth weight of more than 500 g, age of less than 24 hours, need for assisted ventilation with peak inspiratory pressure of more than 16 and fio2 more than 0.30, and roentgenographic evidence of respiratory distress syndrome) were randomized to either conventional (n = 36) or to high-frequency jet (n = 37) ventilation. our goals were to maintain the infants on the assigned ventilator for at least 7 days unless they could either be extubated or meet crossover criteria. univariate analyses were initially used to compare the two groups. stepwise logistic regression was subsequently used to assess whether various factors independently influenced adverse outcomes. the two groups of infants were similar in all obstetrical, perinatal, and neonatal demographic characteristics. the mean birth weight and gestational age in the conventional group were 930 g and 26.6 weeks and in the hfjv group, 961 g and 26.9 weeks. the infants were randomized at similar ages (7.1 and 7.3 hours of life, respectively). their prerandomization ventilator settings and arterial blood gases were nearly identical. there were no differences in pulmonary outcomes (occurrence of air leaks, need for oxygen or ventilation at 36 weeks postconception), and there were no differences in the mean number of days oxygen was required, number of days ventilated, or length of hospital stay. infants ventilated with hfjv were significantly more likely to develop cystic periventricular leukomalacia (10 vs 2, p = .022) or to have a poor outcome (grade iv hemorrhage, cystic periventricular leukomalacia, or death) (17 vs 7, p = .016). logistic regression analysis revealed hfjv to be a significant independent predictor of both cystic periventricular leukomalacia and a poor outcome. the presence of hypocarbia was not an independently significant predictor of adverse outcomes. with the hfjv treatment strategy that we used, use of the high-frequency jet ventilator in the early management of premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome resulted in significantly more adverse outcomes than in those treated with conventional mechanical ventilation.

to describe the prevalence of continuity of care over a 5-year period in a complete cohort of urban children universally insured for medical care provided under fee-for-service reimbursement. all children enrolled in the study were born to women living in metropolitan winnipeg between july 1, 1987 and december 31, 1988 (n = 12,590). all ambulatory physician services for this group were enumerated from computerized administrative databases for the period from birth through 60 months. continuity of care, defined as the proportion of total care provided by the most frequently seen physician or physician practice over time, was calculated for each child. descriptive analyses include an examination of maternal and household characteristics associated with children receiving 80% or more of total ambulatory care from a single provider source. from birth to 24 months, 51% of children received at least 80% of ambulatory visits from a single provider practice. this proportion of the children declined to 28% at 25 through 60 months. children living in low-income neighborhoods had poorer continuity profiles. other household factors associated with poor continuity included young maternal age, single maternal marital status, residential mobility, and inadequate maternal use of prenatal medical care. households affiliated with pediatric practices had better continuity profiles than households affiliated with general medical practices. despite universal medical insurance, barriers to a longitudinally continuous relationship with a primary care provider remain in this setting. although this study has emphasized the description of those barriers associated with household characteristics, there is evidence that factors related to the organization and delivery of medical care are also relevant.

the objective of this study is to describe the longitudinal course of motor development of a group of infants exposed to cocaine in utero and an unexposed control group. subjects included 28 in utero-exposed infants and 22 unexposed infants matched for race, income of the family, and mother's educational level. infants were evaluated at 1 month with the alberta infant motor scale (aims), at 4 months with the aims and movement assessment of infants (mai), at 7 months with the aims and mai, and at 15 months with the peabody developmental motor scales (pdms). at 4 months, compared with the unexposed infants, a significantly larger proportion of the exposed infants fell below the 50th percentile on the aims and had greater proportion of suspicious risk scores on the mai. at 7 months infants in the exposed group had lower aims and mai scores than the control group. there was no difference between groups on the motor scales at 1, 4, or 15 months. at all ages more infants in both groups scored significantly less than the expected norms on all scales. performance was unrelated to a cumulative risk index made up of demographic, medical, and social factors. almost all subjects had risk scores that placed them at extremely high levels of risk. performance may have been related to a difference in weight between groups at 7 months and to decreasing weights for both groups by 15 months. in utero cocaine exposure has a significant, although relatively small, effect on infant motor performance late in infancy. however, regardless of exposure status, these infants had poor performance that may be accounted for by a heavy accumulation of risk factors associated with poverty.

to evaluate two- or three-dose "mixed" regimens of haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccines in the priming series. two randomized clinical trials with 140 and 181 infants, respectively. private practices in new orleans and chicago. in trial i, infants received one of four regimens. two were recommended regimens for polyribosylribitol phosphate (prp)-meningococcal protein conjugate (m) and prp-tetanus toxoid conjugate (t). two mixed regimens consisted of m at 2 months followed by two doses of t or prp-diphtheria toxoid conjugate (d) at 4 and 6 months. trial ii consisted of three groups. two were recommended regimens for m and t. the third was a two-dose mixed regimen consisting of m at 2 months and t at 4 months. parents were interviewed and instructed to record side effects after each vaccination. serum was assayed for h influenzae type b anticapsular antibody (anti-prp). minor differences in safety profiles likely reflected alpha error. in trial i, m (lot 0884t, one of several known to have had decreased immunogenicity), probably primed for substantial increase in serum antibody when d or t was given at 4 and 6 months. in trial ii, infants who received the two-dose mixed regimen (m from immunogenic lot 0116w at 2 months and t at 4 months) had a significantly higher mean area under the curve than recipients of the three-dose ttt regimen when antibody concentration was plotted against age, although the geometric mean anti-prp antibody concentration for the mt-recipients was significantly lower at 7 months. m used in trial i may have primed infants despite poor immunogenicity. the two-dose mixed regimen (mt-) in trial ii produced a mean anti-prp antibody concentration with higher sustained anti-prp concentrations from 2 to 7 months, as judged by the area under the curve, but a lower mean anti-prp antibody concentration at 7 months.

disseminated bacillus calmette-guérin (bcg) infection after inoculation of live vaccine is considered to result from impaired immunity of the child. however, in half of the cases, regarded as idiopathic, no well-defined immunodeficiency condition can account for the infection. the objective of the present study is to report the prevalence, clinical features, associated infections, and outcomes of children with idiopathic disseminated bcg infection. national retrospective survey during the period from 1974 through 1994 in france. all neonatology and pediatrics units in primary care and referral centers throughout france. data were collected from 595 (82%) of 721 units, 377 (93%) of 407 centers, and 320 (93%) of 345 cities. selection criteria included bcg infection, dissemination to at least two areas beyond the inoculation site, and no well-defined immunodeficiency condition. sixteen children (8 girls and 8 boys), born to families unrelated to each other but often consanguinous (5 of 16) or abroad (5 of 16). the minimal prevalence rate was estimated at 0.59 cases per 1 million vaccinated children born in france. clinical features included fever and cachexia, disseminated bcg infection to lymph nodes (15 of 16), skin (13 of 16), soft tissues (11 of 16), lungs (11 of 16), spleen (11 of 16), liver (11 of 16), and bones (9 of 16). eight children had associated or subsequent severe opportunistic infection (50%), with either nontyphi salmonella enterica serotypes (7 of 16) or mycobacterium abscessus (1 of 16). the outcome was poor: 8 children (50%) died; the cause of death was bcg infection for most children (7 of 8); 8 survived until the last follow-up (50%). idiopathic disseminated bcg infection is a rare but severe complication of bcg vaccination. the infection probably results from an as yet unknown genetically determined immunodeficiency condition that affects the killing of intracellular bacteria such as bcg and salmonella.

the national cholesterol education program (ncep) and the american academy of pediatrics recommend selective screening to detect children and adolescents with hypercholesterolemia. we compared the effectiveness of these guidelines with other potential screening strategies in urban african-american adolescents. two hundred sixty african-american adolescents and young adults (192 females and 68 males; age range, 12 to 20 years) who were free from illnesses or medications that disrupt lipid metabolism were included in the study. participants completed a questionnaire regarding their smoking habits, blood pressure, contraceptive pill use, and family history of early heart disease and high cholesterol and had their blood lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins measured (152 fasting and 108 nonfasting). nineteen percent of participants reported family histories of hypercholesterolemia; 26% reported family histories of premature heart disease; and 8% had family histories of both hypercholesterolemia and premature heart disease. therefore, 37% of these participants would have been targeted for cholesterol screening, compared with the 25% predicted by the ncep. less than 50% of the participants with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ldl-c) levels greater than 110 or 130 mg/dl would have been detected by selective screening. total cholesterol was superior as a screening test to apolipoprotein b in predicting ldl-c levels greater than 110 mg/dl (sensitivity, 92% vs 59%). however, total cholesterol minus high-density lipoprotein cholesterol showed better positive predictive value (100%) at ldl-c levels greater than 110 mg/dl than total cholesterol in the fasting (80%) and total groups (90%). in this population, selective screening with total cholesterol, as recommended by the ncep, has such poor sensitivity and positive predictive value that other options may be superior. as an alternative, we recommend the measurement of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol together with total cholesterol at the initial screening step in adolescents and universal screening for those older than 16 years to capture a greater proportion of young adults with increased ldl-c. furthermore, we recommend using the less stringent treatment guidelines established by the adult treatment panel ii for premenopausal women and men younger than 35 years for older adolescents and young adults.

parents have always played a critical role in the care of sick children. although parents' roles remain crucial to children's health, parental availability has declined during the past half century. the percentage of women with preschool children who work has risen almost fivefold in 45 years from 12% in 1947 to 58% in 1992. the percentage of women in the paid work force with school-aged children has almost tripled in the same period, from 27.3% to 75.9%. research has examined the effects of a variety of parental work conditions on children. however, past research has not examined how working conditions affect the ability of parents to care for their sick children. in this article, we examine how often the children of working parents get sick and whether parents receive enough paid leave to care for their sick children. this analysis makes use of two national surveys, which provide complementary information regarding the care of sick children. the national longitudinal survey of youth is a longitudinal survey of a nationally representative probability sample of 12,686 men and women; the national medical expenditure survey is a panel survey of 34,459 people. first, we estimated the family illness burden. second, we looked in detail at the number of days of sick leave mothers had. third, we examined whether mothers who had sick leave had it consistently during a 5-year period. finally, we conducted a logistic regression to determine what factors were significant predictors of both lacking sick leave. more than one in three families faced a family illness burden of 2 weeks or more each year. yet, 28% of mothers had sick leave none of the time they were employed between 1985 and 1990. employed mothers of children with chronic conditions had less sick leave than other employed mothers. thirty-six percent of mothers whose children had chronic conditions had sick leave none of the time they were employed. although 20% of working parents who did not live in poverty lacked sick leave, 38% of parents who did live in poverty lacked sick leave. the problem is also more marked for nonwhite parents. although 23% of working white parents lacked paid sick leave, 31% of nonwhite parents lacked sick leave. one in six families that lacked sick leave had to cover for more than 4 weeks of family illness during the year. in 1993, the us congress passed the family and medical leave act (fmla). however, by limiting the medical leave to the care of major illnesses, primarily those requiring hospitalization, the fmla does not address the majority of children's sick care needs. for the common childhood illnesses that are not covered by the fmla, employed parents often must rely on their sick leave if they are to care for their sick children themselves. yet, we found that many employed parents lack sick leave. this is particularly true of parents of children with chronic conditions and poor and minority families.

the influenza vaccination rate is very low among children with moderate to severe asthma. this may be partly because of poor patient motivation and failure to visit clinics for vaccination. another important factor may be health care providers' deferral of vaccination because of concern about the efficacy and safety of influenza vaccination during asthma exacerbations and concurrent prednisone therapy. we therefore examined the safety and immunogenicity of influenza vaccination during acute asthma exacerbation with concomitant prednisone therapy. a pediatric allergy and pulmonology clinic and a pediatric emergency department. children (n = 109) with a known diagnosis of asthma 6 months to 18 years of age were recruited. all participating patients, 59 without asthma symptoms (no prednisone, control group) and 50 with acute asthma exacerbation requiring prednisone burst therapy (prednisone group) received trivalent subvirion influenza vaccine. fifteen children in the control group and 12 in the prednisone group received a booster dose according to american academy of pediatrics guidelines. serum antibody titers to influenza a/beijing/32/92 (h3n2), influenza a/texas/36/91 (h1n1), and influenza b/panama/45/90 were measured before and 2 weeks after vaccination. adverse effects noted within 48 hours after vaccine dose were ascertained during the follow-up visit. the antibody response was analyzed by comparing mean postvaccine titers, the percentage of patients achieving protective antibody levels (> or = 5log2), and the percentage of patients achieving rises in titers of 2log2 or greater. antibody responses to influenza a/beijing/32/92 (h3n2) and influenza a/texas/36/91 (h1n1) in the prednisone-treated and control groups were not different. a significantly better response to the influenza b/panama/45/90 antigen was seen in the prednisone group for all three parameters. children who received a booster dose and the subgroup of children with low prevaccination titers (< or = 3log2) showed similar patterns. adverse effects, including asthma exacerbation, local swelling at the injection site, fever, rash, and headache, were not different in the two groups. influenza vaccination can be given safely and effectively to asthmatic children regardless of asthma symptoms or concurrent prednisone therapy when necessary. vaccination of all moderate to severe asthmatic patients visiting clinics or emergency departments would improve the overall vaccination rate significantly.

the use of the emergency departments as a regular source of sick care has been increasing, despite the fact that it is costly and is often an inappropriate source of care. this study examines factors associated with routine use of emergency departments by using a national sample of us children. data from the 1988 national health interview survey on child health, a nationally representative sample of 17710 children younger than 18 years, was linked to country-level health resource data from the area resource file. bivariate and multivariate analyses were used to assess the association between children's use of emergency departments as their usual sources of sick care and predisposing need and enabling characteristics of the families, as well as availability of health resources in their communities. in 1988 3.4% or approximately 2 million us children younger than 18 years were reported to use emergency departments as their usual sources of sick care. significant demographic risk factors for reporting an emergency department as a usual source of sick care included black versus white race (odds ratio [or], 2.08), single-parent versus two-parent families (or, 1.53), mothers with less than a high school education versus those with high school or more (or, 1.76), poor versus nonpoor families (or, 1.76), and living in an urban versus suburban setting (or, 1.38). specific indicators of need, such as recurrent health conditions (asthma, tonsillitis, headaches, and febrile seizures), were not associated with routine use of emergency departments for sick care. furthermore, health insurance status and specifically medicaid coverage had no association with use of the emergency department as a usual source of sick care. compared with children who receive well child care in private physicians' offices or health maintenance organizations, children whose sources of well child care were neighborhood health centers were more likely to report emergency departments for sick care (or, 2.01). children residing in counties where the supply of primary care physicians was in the top quintile had half the odds (or, 0.50) of reporting emergency departments as usual sources of sick care. reliance on hospital emergency departments for routine sick care is strongly associated with demographic and social characteristics of the child and family, the type and source of available well child care, and the supply of primary care physicians. because health insurance status was not a significant predictor of use, public policies aimed at reducing the use of emergency departments by children will need to address other factors. these include the organizational characteristics and responsiveness of the health care system and the motivation of families for routine use of hospital emergency departments.

nonketotic hyperglycinemia (nkh) is an inborn error of glycine degradation causing muscular hypotonia, seizures, apnea, and lethargy; it has a poor prognosis. accumulation of glycine in the brain is thought to cause excessive stimulation of the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor. dextromethorphan (dm), an n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonist, in doses of 5 to 35 mg/kg per day has been shown to have beneficial therapeutic effects in some patients with nkh. we report the case of a 1-year-old infant with nkh, seizure disorder, and psychomotor delay who was clinically seizure free during treatment with sodium benzoate, arginine, benzodiazepam, and phenobarbital. although sodium benzoate normalized serum glycine levels (103 to 125 mumol/l), cerebrospinal fluid glycine levels remained elevated (42 to 47 mumol/l), with epileptiform activity on electroencephalography. the addition of low-dose dm (0.25 mg/kg per day) to the treatment led to improvement of electroencephalographic activity, resolution of nystagmus with increased eye contact, and modest progression of developmental milestones. these data suggest that dm at doses significantly lower than previously reported may be beneficial in some patients with nkh. treatment with low-dose dm needs further evaluation.

the eye is a sensitive indicator of adverse effects of prenatal alcohol exposure. anomalies of the eyes and their adnexa are known to be associated with the fetal alcohol syndrome (fas), although long-term effects of these malformations are unknown. a prospective ophthalmologic follow-up (median, 11 years; range, 4 to 19 years) was performed in 25 children with fas. their social situation and educational status were also investigated. all but one of the children had ophthalmologic abnormalities. fundus anomalies were observed in 23 children, of whom 19 had optic nerve hypoplasia. thirteen children had concomitant strabismus. microphthalmos, buphthalmos, phthisis, microcornea, coloboma of the iris and uvea, blepharoptosis, cataract, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, and nystagmus were observed in single cases. the dysmorphology of the eyes remained unchanged during the follow-up period. in 2 children with severe mental retardation and, initially, very poor vision, the severe visual handicap persisted. seventeen children had an initial visual activity > or = 20/70, which remained unchanged in 10 children and improved in 7 children, despite the presence of optic nerve hypoplasia in 14 of the children. ten mothers died, 8 of them because of alcohol-related diseases, and only 4 of the mothers were able to take care of their children. sixteen children went to schools for the mentally retarded, and only 3 children had a normal school education without extra teaching assistance. in children with fas, the major sequela, ie, brain, damage, remains despite extensive medical, educational, and social support. the presence of ophthalmic signs, which persisted but did not deteriorate during the follow-up period, strengthens the diagnosis of fas, and the high frequency of ocular involvement indicates the importance of a complete ophthalmologic evaluation in children with fas.

to determine the growth and physical outcome at 2 years of age for children born after assisted reproductive techniques in the state of victoria. using a case-matched control study between january 1991 and july 1993, 314 children (196 singletons, 47 sets of twins, 8 sets of triplets) conceived after in vitro fertilization (ivf) and related techniques at the monash ivf and royal women's hospital reproductive biology unit and 150 control children (113 singletons, 17 sets of twins, 1 set of triplets) randomly selected from the general population using the victorian perinatal data collection unit records were enrolled to be examined for minor dysmorphic and major organ abnormalities. singleton and twin cases were matched for plurality and gestation and date of birth. triplets were not matched. ivf status was not a significant independent factor for physical outcomes, including malformation rates, nor for days of hospitalization postdischarge and operations. there was no significant interaction between ivf status and mean percentiles for weight and head circumference. the ivf group had a greater mean length percentile. twins in both groups had significantly poorer physical outcomes than singletons on some measures. this study did not demonstrate an independent ivf effect on the growth and physical outcome of children at 2 years of age when matched for plurality and gestation. the poor outcomes where noted were related to the effects of multiple births. these findings must be viewed in context of the response rates and therefore representativeness of the data. the need for longitudinal studies is demonstrated.

to examine the degree of agreement between parental reporting of the development of high-risk infants and professional assessment by a multidisciplinary team. the developmental status of 196 infants discharged from neonatal intensive care units (nicus) was assessed by their parents using the infant monitoring questionnaire (imq) at 4, 8, or 12 months' corrected age. on the same day, a clinical assessment was done by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a developmental pediatrician, physical therapist, and psychologist. the kappa statistic was used to measure agreement between the assessments. logistic regression was used to investigate factors that might influence agreement. both the imq and the multidisciplinary team classified infants as developing normally ("normal"), being at risk for abnormal development ("suspect"), or developing abnormally ("abnormal"). although the same proportion of children fell into the three categories by both assessments, parents and the multidisciplinary team showed poor agreement with respect to the classification of individual infants (kappa = 0.276). no infant or family characteristic was found to have an influence on agreement. for a group of high-risk infants discharged from nicus, the agreement between parental assessment of developmental status using the imq and the professional assessment by a multidisciplinary team is poor in the first year of life. we do not recommend the use of this questionnaire as a substitute for clinical assessment of biologically at-risk infants discharged from nicus. however, it may be useful for those groups of infants for whom no other information is available or as an adjunct to clinical assessment when infants are not behaving typically because of an unfamiliar setting or concurrent illness.

familial hypercholesterolemia (fh), an inherited autosomal dominant disorder of lipoprotein metabolism, is associated with premature atherosclerosis. the recommended pediatric therapy consists of dietary intervention and, when necessary, treatment with bile acid-binding resins. however, compliance has been poor in many children. therefore, our objectives were to determine the efficacy, safety, and tolerance of the short-term use of lovastatin, a 3-hydroxy 3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase inhibitor, in the control of severe fh in a male pediatric population and to evaluate the dose-response relationship. sixty-nine male patients with fh 12.9 +/- 2.4 years of age (mean +/- sd) participated in this multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial. after a 4-week placebo period, the patients were allocated to four treatment groups (lovastatin 10, 20, 30, 40 mg/d) for 8 weeks. plasma lipid and apolipoprotein (apo) concentrations were measured every 2 weeks. clinical and laboratory evidence of adverse events was monitored periodically throughout the study. all lovastatin doses reduced total cholesterol (-17% to -29%), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (-21% to -36%), and apob (-19% to -28%) concentrations. a dose-response relationship was seen, and between-group comparisons showed that results were significantly improved up to a dose of 30 mg/d. we observed a 7% increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and a 4% increase in apoa1 concentrations. the medication was well tolerated by all patients. no serious clinical adverse experience was reported. lovastatin increased aspartate aminotransferase concentrations, but there was no evidence of a dose-response relationship, and no value exceeded two times the upper limit of normal. no significant change in alanine aminotransferase was observed. three patients had marked (more than three times the upper limit of normal) asymptomatic elevations in their creatine kinase values, which returned spontaneously to normal, and no action was required regarding the drug.

a large body of medical knowledge exists that can inform the public policy debate as to whether the current needs and future life prospects of poor children could better be served in orphanages than by continuing safety net programs, such as aid to families with dependent children, medicaid, and supplemental social security income, which maintain children in families. this special article explores a century of pediatric and child psychiatry research covering five areas of potential biologic and social risk to infants and young children in orphanage care: (1) infectious morbidity, (2) nutrition and growth, (3) cognitive development, (4) socioaffective development, and (5) physical and sexual abuse. these data demonstrate that infants and young children are uniquely vulnerable to the medical and psychosocial hazards of institutional care, negative effects that cannot be reduced to a tolerable level even with massive expenditure. scientific experience consistently shows that, in the short term, orphanage placement puts young children at increased risk of serious infectious illness and delayed language development. in the long term, institutionalization in early childhood increases the likelihood that impoverished children will grow into psychiatrically impaired and economically unproductive adults.

the risk of seizure relapse after antiepileptic drug (aed) discontinuation in children has been reported to vary between 6% and 40%. it has been suggested that neurologic deficit and mental retardation are poor prognostic factors for seizure relapse after aed discontinuation. because epileptic children with cerebral palsy (cp) have neurologic deficits, and many have mental retardation, it is important to know their risk for seizure relapse. aed treatment was discontinued in 65 children with cp and histories of epilepsy after 2 seizure-free years. all of the patients were followed until they had seizure relapses or for at least 2 years without seizures after aeds were stopped. multiple factors were analyzed for possible association with seizure relapse. twenty-seven patients (41.5%) had seizure relapses. patients with spastic hemiparesis had the highest relapse rate (61.5%), and those with spastic diplegia had the lowest rate (14.3%). no other factor correlated significantly with the risk of seizure relapse. discontinuation of aeds in children with cp can, and should, be practiced when possible after patients have been seizure-free for at least 2 years. aed discontinuation in patients with spastic hemiparesis is significantly more likely to lead to seizure relapse than in patients with other cp types, but no other factor is yet known to increase the chance of relapse.

congressional initiatives to reduce spending under major public programs designed to improve access to health care have brought renewed attention to the health care needs of traditionally disadvantaged populations. the objective of this study was to assess access to and use of primary care services for poor, minority, and uninsured children in the united states. we analyzed data on 7578 1- to 17-year-old children of families responding to the 1987 national medical expenditure survey, a nationally representative sample of families and children. adult respondents were asked to report on several measures of access and use of care for children in the household. these included the presence of a usual source of care and its characteristics (type of site, travel time, waiting time, after-hours care, and availability of a regular physician). we also examined the volume of physician contacts relative to the sample child's health status, the receipt of measles vaccinations, and whether children received care in response to selected symptoms of ill health. results are presented for children generally and for four subgroups: poor children; minority children; uninsured children; and white, non-poor, insured children (the reference group). poor, minority, and uninsured children fared consistently worse than the children in the reference group on all indicators studied. for example, children in each of the three at-risk groups were twice as likely as the children in the reference group to lack usual sources of care, nearly twice as likely to wait 60 minutes or more at their sites of care, and used only about half as many physician services after adjusting for health status. multivariate analyses revealed that poverty, minority status, and absence of insurance exert independent effects on access to and use of primary care. the existence of substantial barriers to the access to and use of primary care for low-income, minority, and uninsured children is cause for significant concern, especially in an era of program cutbacks. new initiatives are needed to address both financial and non-financial barriers to the receipt of primary care for disenfranchised children.

identifying febrile children with invasive bacterial infection is difficult in the absence of telltale physical findings. urine latex agglutination (ula) tests have been used for rapid, on-site identification of such children. to study the performance of ula tests in identifying children with haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae, and group b streptococcus infection and to examine how the results of ula tests affect patient treatment. retrospective review. urban children's hospital. all emergency department and hospital patients tested by ula in 1990, excluding patients in the neonatal units. of 1629 patients, 36 had positive tests (20 h influenzae, 5 s pneumoniae, and 11 group b streptococcus). thirteen of these were false positive based on culture results. although ula tests demonstrated excellent specificity, their sensitivity was poor. positive predictive values for bacteremia ranged from 0.346 to 0.600, and negative predictive values ranged from 0.972 to 0.997. the decision to treat with antibiotics was made before ula test results were available in 19 (53%) of the 36 patients with positive test results. of 1593 patients with negative test results, 1211 (76%) were admitted to the hospital, and approximately 81% were empirically treated with parenteral antibiotics. in clinical practice, treatment and disposition decisions are frequently made without regard to ula test results.

to correlate the initial and maximal lactate levels with the occurrence of intracranial hemorrhage (ich) and survival in patients treated with extracorporeal life support (ecls). retrospective chart review. pediatric intensive care unit. eighty-two neonatal patients placed on ecls for respiratory failure due to sepsis, meconium aspiration, or persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. the initial lactate level measured within 6 hours of initiating ecls and the maximal lactate level measured throughout the ecls course were collected. lactate levels were described as mean lactate +/- se (mm). head ultrasound reports and survival were reviewed. platelet counts and activated clotting times (acts) were examined. the mean initial and maximal lactate levels were higher in ecls patients who developed ich (initial: 10 +/- 1.7 mm vs 6.4 +/- 0.8 mm, p = .05 and maximal: 12.4 +/- 2.5 mm vs 7.9 +/- 0.8 mm, p = .04). initial and maximal lactate levels were also elevated in nonsurvivors (initial: 11.7 +/- 3 mm vs 6.4 +/- 0.7 mm, p = .01 and maximal: 14.8 +/- 3.3 mm vs 7.8 +/- 0.8 mm, p < .01). platelet counts and act did not differ in patients with and without ich. lactate is a useful marker for the development of ich in ecls patients. in addition, elevated lactates during ecls identify a subgroup of patients with poor outcome. prospective studies are needed to determine whether the incorporation of this information into pre-ecls and ecls management will decrease the occurrence of ich and improve survival.

we compared the effects of a policy of neonatal steroid administration versus placebo for babies chronically dependent on supplemental oxygen in terms of long-term health and development, judged at 3 years of age. double-blind randomized controlled trial. thirty-one centers in the united kingdom, ireland, belgium, germany, canada, and the united states. babies who were chronically dependent on supplemental oxygen between 2 and 12 weeks of age were recruited to the trial between 1986 and 1989. sixty-two children were known to have died, 23 before discharge from the hospital and 10 afterward in the active group, compared with 25 and 4, respectively, in the placebo group. information was available for 209 of the 212 eligible for follow-up (99%). a 1-week course of active dexamethasone phosphate 0.6 mg/kg/d (dexamethasone base 0.5 mg/kg/d) or saline placebo was given intravenously (or orally, if no intravenous line). there was an option to give a second tapering 9-day course if relapse occurred after initial improvement. information about respiratory problems, growth, neurodevelopment and disability, infection, and health service use when the children were 3 years old was ascertained from questionnaires to general practitioners, health visitors, and parents (and occasionally pediatricians). about half the children in both groups had been admitted to the hospital for respiratory problems, with more in the active than the placebo group having at least five outpatient consultations for these problems over the 3 years. overall, the children were below average in height, weight, and head circumference. about one fifth had cerebral palsy, 8% some visual loss, and 16% hearing loss; 18% needed or were anticipated to need special schooling. there were no clear differences between the randomized groups. these overall conclusions were not altered by any of the prespecified secondary analyses. despite early benefits, there were no clear effects at 3 years of age. as 40% of the placebo group eventually received open steroids, even a trial of this size has limited statistical power to detect a moderate effect of the policy. regardless of random allocation, overall morbidity was high, confirming that babies with protracted dependence on supplemental oxygen are at high risk of childhood disability and poor health.

in the evolving health care delivery paradigm, physicians manage overall health status rather than illness, and providers rather than insurance companies bear the risk. consequently, interest in prevention--long of prime interest to pediatricians--is increasing among all providers. the ethical practice of medicine in a managed care environment involves providing care at a level that avoids high cost with poor outcomes. high cost with poor outcomes can be the result of either undertreatment or overtreatment. purchasers of health care today are clear about what they want--low cost, convenient access for their employees, medically appropriate, documented treatment, and patient satisfaction--and they are clear about how they intend to get what they want. different areas of the country are at different stages in the evolution of managed care. physicians who practice in markets that are still in early stages must plan ahead, taking the lead in shaping the changes that are occurring and preparing their practices for managed care. otherwise, someone less concerned about quality of care will shape them. solo or small group practices will survive, but those that survive will not be independent. the necessary affiliation with larger entities does not mean that clinical autonomy and freedom must be sacrificed.

to determine the percentage of term newborns discharged by 24 hours of life and the actions taken by physicians and institutions to avoid false-negative phenylketonuria (pku) screens in these infants. descriptive cross-sectional survey. one hundred forty term nurseries and 157 pediatricians. stratified sampling techniques were used to sample nurseries from the 1992 american hospital association guide to provide equal representation of each region of the country. pediatricians were systematically sampled from a national list of practicing pediatricians supplied by ross laboratories to provide equal sampling from each state. the response rates were 95% (n = 133) for term nurseries and 83% (n = 131) for pediatricians. twenty-four percent of healthy newborns are discharged by 24 hours of life. ninety-three percent of nurseries screen all infants for pku before discharge. in states without laws mandating rescreening, only 48% of institutions that discharge the majority of their infants (> 50%) by 24 hours of life rescreen. also, in states without rescreening laws, 64% of pediatricians rescreen. the timing of this repeat screen ranges from less than 72 hours of life to 4 weeks. determining which infants to rescreen varies by practitioner; some rescreen all infants, whereas others rescreen those discharged early. just more than half of all pediatricians, whether practicing in a state requiring repeat pku screening, claim to be familiar with the american academy of pediatrics recommendations regarding repeated pku screening of infants discharged by 24 hours of life. twenty-four percent of term newborns in the united states are discharged by 24 hours of life. most hospitals screen all infants for pku before discharge regardless of age. the majority of states do not mandate rescreening; rescreening policies among pediatricians and institutions in those states vary widely. a significant number of infants do not receive repeated screening and are therefore at risk for delayed or missed diagnosis of pku because of insensitive initial screens. pediatrician awareness of the need to perform repeated pku screens on infants discharged by 24 hours is poor.

to evaluate the impact of introducing complementary foods to exclusively breast-fed infants at 4 vs 6 months on growth from 6 to 12 months, and to compare growth patterns of honduran infants with those of breast-fed infants in the united states. randomized intervention trial from 4 to 6 months and longitudinal study of infants from birth to 12 months. low-income communities in san pedro sula, honduras. primiparous, breast-feeding mothers and their infants (n = 141) recruited from public maternity hospitals. infants were randomly assigned to exclusive breast-feeding to 6 months, or exclusive breast-feeding with addition of hygienically prepared, nutritionally adequate complementary foods at 4 months, with or without maintenance of baseline breast-feeding frequency. after 6 months, mothers continued to breast-feed and also fed their infants home-prepared foods after receiving instruction in appropriate feeding practices. infant weight was measured monthly during the first year of life and infant length monthly from 4 to 12 months. growth parameters were compared between the honduran and us cohorts using multiple-regression and repeated-measures analysis of variance. stepwise multiple regression was used to identify determinants of infant growth. there were no differences in growth patterns by intervention group. mean birth weight of the honduran infants was significantly less than that of a cohort of breast-fed infants in an affluent us population (n = 46) (2889 +/- 482 vs 3611 +/- 509 g), but the honduran infants exhibited rapid catch up in weight in the first few months of life, and the cohorts were similar in weight by 3 months. mean weight and length gain were similar to those of the us cohort from 4 to 9 months but were lower from 9 to 12 months. mean length for age was significantly less than that of the us cohort from 4 to 12 months; this was attributable to the difference in maternal height (12 cm shorter in honduras on average). within the honduran cohort, growth velocity of low birth weight infants (< 2500 g; n = 28) was similar to that of their normal birth weight peers; thus, the former subgroup remained smaller than the latter throughout the first year of life. in poor populations, when breast-feeding is exclusive for the first 4 to 6 months, continues from 6 to 12 months, and is accompanied by generally adequate complementary foods, faltering in weight does not occur before 9 months among infants born with birth weights of more than 2500 g.

we had shown previously that preterm infants undergo three phases of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis; prediuretic, diuretic, and postdiuretic. the objectives of the present study were: (1) to determine whether infants even more immature and infants cared for under thermal environmental conditions different from those previously studied also undergo these three phases; and (2) to relate these phases to changes in renal function. consecutive, timed urine collections were made during the first 5 days of life in 32 infants with birth weights of 1000 g or less. infants were cared for in radiant warmers for 24 hours and then transferred to nonhumidified incubators. diuresis was defined as urine flow rate (v) of 3 ml or more/kg per hour and weight loss of 0.8 g or more/kg per hour. the physiologic relationships among water and sodium balance, insensible water loss, arterial blood pressure, and renal function were made during the three phases. twenty-eight (87%) of the 32 infants underwent the three homeostatic phases. the median ages of onset and cessation of diuresis were 25 and 96 hours, respectively. there was no correlation between onset of diuresis and change of thermal environment. during the prediuretic phase, v averaged 1.6 ml/kg per hour, and 17 of 28 infants had at least one collection period in which v was less than 1 ml/kg per hour; urinary sodium excretion was 0.1 meq/kg per hour; the glomerular filtration rate (gfr) was 0.22 ml/kg per hour; fractional excretion of sodium (fena) was 6.2%; and urine osmolality was dilute (221 mosm/kg). during the diuretic phase, v and sodium excretion more than tripled; gfr and fena doubled; and there was no change in urine osmolality. during postdiuresis, v and na excretion decreased to values intermediate between the prediuretic and diuretic phases, and fena fell to prediuretic levels, but there was no change in gfr or urine osmolality. there was poor correlation between blood pressure and gfr. insensible water loss was high and variable during all phases, exceeding 190 ml/kg per day in the smallest infants. extremely low birth weight infants manifest three phases of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis, as do more mature infants, independent of thermal environment. diuresis and natriuresis are the result of abrupt increases in gfr and fena. we speculate that this may be the result of expansion of the neonatal extracellular space as fetal lung fluid is reabsorbed.

to describe the pattern of immunization in the cohort of children who entered public schools in virginia in 1992. this was a historic cohort study using stratified cluster sampling. three strata were created based on the socioeconomic status (ses) of the children in the catchment area of each public school in virginia. the random sample included public elementary schools throughout virginia. immunization records were obtained for a randomly selected cohort of 2519 first-grade children in virginia. age at completion of recommended childhood vaccines was determined from birth to school entry by ses, race, and population density. provider practices were assessed by ascertaining missed opportunities for simultaneous administration of vaccinations according to recommended schedules. although immunization completion rates were high at school entry, low levels of immunization coverage were found in all areas of virginia at 24 months of age regardless of ses (as measured by per capita income), population density, or race. however, under-immunization was more severe for poor children in urban areas (42.3% of children in low-ses urban areas were age-appropriately immunized at 24 months of age versus 64.0% in children in high-ses rural areas). by multivariate logistic regression, race and gender were not predictors of which children were appropriately immunized at 2 years of age after adjusting for the following: ses, population density, receiving the first dtp (diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis) or opv (oral polio) vaccination after 3 months of age, and failure to have the first dtp administered simultaneously with the first opv or the second dtp administered simultaneously with the second opv. receiving the first dtp or opv vaccination after 3 months of age and failure to have the first and second dtp and opv administered simultaneously were the strongest predictors of not being age-appropriately immunized at 2 years of age. the effect of failure to vaccinate simultaneously on predicting vaccination coverage at 2 years of age was strongly modified by ses. children who attended schools located in census tracts with per capita incomes less than $10,600 and who did not have the first and second doses of dtp and opv administered simultaneously were 33.19 times more likely not to be age-appropriately immunized at 2 years of age compared with children who attended schools located in census tracts with per capita incomes greater than $18,800 and who received the first and second doses of dtp and opv simultaneously (95% confidence interval: 18.29 to 60.22). although beginning the immunization schedule at the recommended age was crucial to appropriate vaccination later in life, provider practices were important predictors of under-immunization. failure to administer vaccinations simultaneously strongly influenced poorer children in virginia. serious delays in vaccine administration were observed not only for poor children in urban areas, but also in all areas of virginia before school entry.

in order to be effective those wishing to improve emergency care of children in an urban environment must be aware of barriers as well as resources. urban children are at high risk for requiring emergency care as a result of both illness and injury. these children face a dangerous environment resulting from the problems of poverty, homelessness, overcrowded living conditions, drug abuse, and a shrinking tax base. they face this nation's highest rates of violent injury (intentional and unintentional), immunization delays, and preventable infectious diseases such as tb and measles. in addition, they have poor access to quality primary health care and suffer the greatest morbidity rates from chronic diseases such as asthma and diabetes. on the other hand, there is great opportunity to ensure that urban children receive quality emergency health care. the urban environment is rich in "centers of pediatric excellence," which often have paid full-time ems systems in operation, and is the locale in which the majority of pediatric emergency medicine specialists and prehospital advanced life support providers practice. the child advocate must work to ensure that the urban child can benefit from these resources.

to evaluate individualized growth assessment using the rossavik growth model for detection of growth-retarded neonates with poor perinatal outcomes. rossavik growth models derived from second-trimester ultrasound measurements were used to predict birth characteristics of 154 singleton neonates. individual fetal growth curve standards for head and abdominal circumference and weight were determined from the data of two scans obtained before 25 weeks' menstrual age and separated by an interval of at least 5 weeks. comparisons between actual and predicted birth characteristics were expressed by the growth potential realization index and the neonatal growth assessment score (ngas). the proportions of perinatal outcomes (mechanical delivery, low apgar score, abnormal fetal heart rate [fhr] patterns, neonatal acidosis, meconium staining of amniotic fluid, neonatal intensive care unit admission, and maternal complications), using ngas, were compared with those by the traditional birth weight-for-gestational age method and the ponderal index, respectively. of the 154 fetuses studied, 120 had normal growth outcomes at birth; 18 showed evidence of intrauterine growth retardation; and 16 had macrosomia, based on ngas. according to birth weight-for-gestational age classification, 32 fetuses were small for gestational age; 118 were appropriate for gestational age; and only 4 were large for gestational age. according to the ponderal index, 55 fetuses had growth retardation, 99 showed appropriate growth and there was no macrosomia. there was a significant increase in mechanical deliveries in cases of growth-retarded neonates, determined using the ngas classification, when compared with events related to normally grown or macrosomic neonates. however, there were no significant differences in mechanical deliveries among the groups by birth weight classification or ponderal index. both birth weight classification and ngas classification showed a significant increase in the low apgar score, abnormal fhr patterns, and neonatal acidosis in infants classified as growth retarded when compared with appropriately grown or macrosomic infants. however, there were no significant differences in the low apgar score, abnormal fhr patterns, and neonatal acidosis between growth-retarded and appropriately grown infants when they had been so classified by ponderal index. three growth category classification methods failed to reveal significant differences in meconium staining of amniotic fluid, neonatal intensive care unit admission, and maternal complications among the groups. we do cast doubt on the usefulness of the ponderal index for detection of growth-retarded neonates with poor perinatal outcomes, and individualized growth assessment seems to perform at least as well as the traditional birth weight-for-gestational age method.

to determine the effect of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (bpd) on growth at school age. a prospective cohort study. the sample included 406 children selected from a reconstructed cohort of infants of very low birth weight previously enrolled in a multisite, randomized, controlled clinical trial. the children were contacted at 8 to 10 years of age. height, weight, and head circumference (hc) were measured. possible confounders including sociodemographic data, and neonatal factors were also recorded. the children in the bpd group were significantly smaller in weight (z score, -0.50 +/- 1.19 sd vs -0.06 +/- 1.30 sd) and hc (z score, -1.41 +/- 1.32 sd vs -0.63 +/- 1.62 sd) than those without bpd. however, after controlling for cofounders (using analysis of covariance), no significant differences were demonstrated between the two groups. power analyses showed that a difference of at least 0.43 z score units could have been detected. the previously documented associations between bpd and suspected confounders were reconfirmed. significant differences were noted between children with and without bpd for weight and hc but not height. when possible confounders were taken into account, the differences were no longer appreciated. thus, the previously reported poor growth in children with bpd may have been related to other factors and not necessarily to bpd.

to determine the utility of a disposable colorimetric end-tidal co2 detector during pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) for (1) confirming endotracheal tube (ett) position, and (2) assessing the relationship between end-tidal co2 recorded by this method and outcome of pediatric cpr. prospective observations during cpr in a university children's hospital. forty children (28 male, 12 female) aged 1 week to 10 years (25 children aged < or = 1 year, mean age 27.2 months, median 7 months), weighing 2.5 to 40 kg (31 children weighing < or = 15 kg, mean 10.94 kg, median 7 kg) who underwent a total of 48 endotracheal intubations during cpr. after intubation, ett position was verified by usual clinical methods including direct visualization. the device was attached between the ett and ventilation bag, the patient was manually ventilated, and a first reading was obtained. any color change from purple (area a, end-tidal co2 < 0.5%) to tan or yellow (area b or c, end-tidal co2 > or = 0.5%) was considered to be positive for airway intubation. cpr was conducted as per pediatric advanced life support guidelines. a second reading was obtained when the decision to discontinue cpr was made. all nine esophageal tube positions were correctly identified by the detector. thirty-three of 39 tracheal tube positions were correctly identified (p < .001). for verifying ett position, the device had a sensitivity of 84.6%, specificity of 100%, positive predictive value of 100%, and negative predictive value of 60%. readings were obtained at the end of cpr in 25 patients. all 13 patients who regained spontaneous circulation and survived to icu admission had a second reading in the c range, while none of the 12 patients with a second reading in the a or b range survived. both the first and second end-tidal co2 readings in the c range correlated significantly with short-term survival (p = .01 and p < .001, respectively). two patients were eventually discharged from the hospital. during cpr a positive test confirms placement of the ett within the airway, whereas a negative test indicates either esophageal intubation or airway intubation with poor or absent pulmonary blood flow and requires an alternate means of confirmation of tube position. the detector may be of prognostic value for return of spontaneous circulation and short-term survival.

we previously demonstrated that acidosis (ph < 7.15) predicts poor motor outcome in very low birth weight (vlbw) infants. the present study was undertaken to examine the association between acidosis and developmental outcome in more detail and to better understand the interrelationship of acidosis with related factors such as hypoxemia and hypotension. the nursery records of 191 infants enrolled in our vlbw follow-up study were reviewed to identify the type of acidosis (metabolic or respiratory) present, measure the duration of single and cumulative episodes, and examine the interaction of acidosis with hypoxemia and hypotension. the bayley scales of infant development and a detailed neurologic examination were performed at 6 (n = 158) and 24 (n = 106) months corrected age. at 6 months, both respiratory and metabolic acidosis as well as the total duration and longest single episode of acidosis were significantly correlated with cognitive, motor, and neurologic outcome (p < .0001). by 24 months, only the association of the metabolic component of acidosis with all three outcome measures remained significant. duration of hypotension independently correlated with outcome at both testing periods (p < .002) but isolated hypoxemia did not. the metabolic component of acidosis and isolated hypotension contributed significantly to the variance in all three outcome measures (p < .05). duration of hypoxemia, but not hypotension, contributed significantly (53%) to the variance in the metabolic component of acidosis. we conclude that it is the metabolic component of acidosis that is important in predicting poor developmental outcome in vlbw infants. the detrimental effect of hypoxemia appears to be closely related to the occurrence of metabolic acidosis while hypotension has an independent effect on outcome.

the association of childhood sexual intercourse, excluding sexual abuse, with adolescent health and risk behaviors was examined using the urban component of a statewide study on adolescent health, risky behaviors, and resiliency factors. a specialized cohort design was used to derive a two-group sample. index cases consisted of all adolescents who indicated that they had first intercourse at or before age 10 years, and controls were adolescents who either had not yet had intercourse or had done so at age 16 years or older. to avoid confounding with issues of sexual abuse, all adolescents who also indicated a history of sexual abuse on the survey were removed from the analysis, so that the comparison could focus on health and behavioral correlates of respondents who did not define their childhood sexual intercourse as constituting abuse. comparisons were conducted separately for girls and boys. a significantly greater proportion of index cases than controls indicated problem substance use by parents, poor school performance, gang involvement, frequent and unprotected sexual intercourse, history of pregnancy involvement, desire to leave the home, history of mental health treatment, emotional distress, and suicidal involvement. logistic regression revealed significant group differences including academic risk, gang involvement, frequency of sexual intercourse, and history of mental health treatment. correct group classification with the logit model was approximately 90% for both girls and boys. the results underscore the importance of childhood sexual intercourse as an indicator of other health-compromising behaviors and risk factors. clinicians should be alert to this clustering of risk behaviors in their psychosocial assessment of young people.

to assess the reliability of the monolert test, a new enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the diagnosis of acute infectious mononucleosis (im). a retrospective laboratory and clinical analysis of 38 children diagnosed with acute im. a suburban pediatric practice in connecticut. thirty-eight children (ages 18 months to 17 years) who were diagnosed with acute im using the monolert test during the period october 1992 to august 1993. eighty-three percent of these children had no evidence of epstein-barr virus infection on subsequent investigation. the false positive results of the monolert test could not be explained on the basis of elevated antibody titers to either cytomegalovirus or borrelia burgdorferi. monolert is a poor screening test and is of little apparent value as a diagnostic test for acute epstein-barr virus infection in pediatric patients.

to examine the effect of birth weight on the classroom behavior of children during elementary school (n = 1120; mean age = 9.16 years). the study used an inception cohort. participants were from two previously studied multi-site cohorts: very low birth weight (vlbw) children referred to participating intensive care units and heavier low birth weight (hlbw) children from a stratified random sample of births in geographically defined regions. teacher reports of children's behavior were obtained for 80% of those eligible. information was obtained for 137 children who were extremely low birth weight (elbw, < or = 1000 g at birth), 223 who were other very low birth weight (ovlbw, 1001 to 1500 g), 434 who were hlbw (1501 to 2500 g), and 326 who were normal birth weight (nbw, > 2500 g). the child's teacher provided reports of language and attention in the classroom, behavior problems, and social competence. comparisons were made among the four birth weight groups: elbw, ovlbw, hlbw, and nbw. the elbw children had lower attention and language skills, overall social competence, scholastic competence, and athletic ability than all other birth weight groups as measured by classroom teachers, even when controlling for neonatal stay, child's gender and ethnicity, and maternal education. all low birth weight (lbw) children had lower attention and language skills and scholastic competence and higher daydreaming and hyperactivity scores than nbw children. white children and children with more educated mothers generally had greater language and attention and social competence scores and fewer behavior problems; girls had fewer behavior problems than boys. neonatal health was generally not associated with outcomes, except that healthier children had lower anxiety scores. the classroom behavior of lbw (< 2500 g) children was rated by teachers as poor, even for children who had not failed a grade; lbw children who are on grade level still may be at risk for school problems. differences between elbw and nbw children persisted for overall language and attention and social competence scores even when additional controls were added for sociodemographic and familial variables. of these variables, maternal depression and home environment were significantly associated with social competence scores.

to identify the clinical factors and/or test results necessary to determine the diagnosis and prognosis for a group of neonates who presented with respiratory insufficiency and multiple contractures. we performed a retrospective review of medical records and identified 15 newborns over a 10-year period (1980 through 1990) who had arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and required ventilator support at birth. we designed a 104 item data base to record clinical information; this was subsequently analyzed using the clinfo data base program for statistical analysis. fourteen of the 15 patients died. of the fourteen, 13 were electively extubated after a variable time course (2 hours to 64 days). autopsies performed on all 14 revealed an approximately equal distribution of central nervous system (cns) malformations, peripheral neuropathies, and peripheral myopathies as the etiology. the single survivor had myasthenia gravis. in neonates with arthrogryposis, ventilator dependence at birth carries a poor prognosis. prenatal factors that potentially predict respiratory insufficiency for the fetus with arthrogryposis include decreased fetal movements, polyhydramnios, micrognathia, and thin ribs. the combination of a thorough physical examination and radiographic and neuromuscular studies may not result in a specific diagnosis, but it can indicate whether the abnormality is in the cns, peripheral nerves or muscles. before elective withdrawal of ventilatory support, an edrophonium chloride challenge test should be performed to rule out myasthenia gravis.

relatively few studies have been made of children with lupus nephritis. the prognosis of children with lupus nephritis is ominous for those with diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis and active interstitial inflammation. up to now few studies have been made on this subject. to evaluate the clinical course, histopathology, and prognosis of lupus nephritis in children, to identify the risk factors for renal failure and mortality, and to share our experience in treating lupus nephritis in children. retrospectively, 167 children under 18 years of age with lupus nephritis at veterans general hospital-taipei, taiwan from 1979 to 1991 were studied. all patients received renal biopsy and follow-up biopsies were performed in 36 children. the clinical and serologic parameters at the time of renal biopsy were recorded. there were 55 (33%) patients with class ii, 30 (18%) with class iii, 69 (41.3%) with class iv, and 13 (7.8%) with class v nephritis based on initial biopsy. the mean follow-up time was 59 months. follow-up biopsies were histologically stationary in 29 patients, progressive in five, and regressive in two. the results revealed that those with persistent hypertension, anemia, increased serum creatinine concentration, and decreased creatinine clearance rate at initial biopsy were more prone to develop renal failure. low titer of ch50 hemolytic assay appeared to be a poor prognostic indicator. the overall renal and patient 5-year survival rates were 93.1% (135/145) and 91.08% (143/157), respectively. they were 87.7% (50/57) and 82% (55/67), respectively, of patients with class iv proliferative glomerulonephritis. the prognosis of children with class iv nephritis in this study was better than that reported previously. all children surviving without renal failure were maintaining their normal lives with little organ dysfunction. the improved results may be due to earlier renal biopsy for precise histopathologic definition, better supportive care, and selective use of aggressive therapy, including methylprednisolone pulse therapy, intravenous cyclophosphamide, intravenous prostaglandin e1 therapy, high-dose intravenous gammaglobulin therapy, and cyclosporin a for those with high risk factors.

to determine the effect of immediate resuscitative efforts on the neurological outcome of children with submersion injury. a case-control study was designed to determine if immediate resuscitation by rescuers or bystanders reduces the frequency of severe neurological damage or death in children with a documented submersion event. logistic regression was used calculate an adjusted odds ratio. the study group consisted of 166 children, aged zero to 14 years, having a submersion event during may 1984 through august 1992, and admitted through various emergency departments to huntington memorial hospital in pasadena, california. all study subjects had an observed and documented episode of apnea at the time of submersion. outcomes were evaluated on the basis of neurological impairment or death. exposure was verified from historical accounts of postsubmersion events provided by family, friends, and/or paramedical personnel. the study factors included age and gender, duration of submersion, hypothermia, presence of apnea, resuscitative efforts, and clinical outcome. children with a good outcome were 4.75 (adjusted odds ratio (or)) times more likely to have a history of immediate resuscitation than children with poor outcome (95% confidence interval: 3.44 < or < 6.06, p = .0001). various types of resuscitative efforts and potential confounding factors were also evaluated. cpr and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation were the most effective types for the prevention of death or severe anoxic encephalopathy. immediate resuscitation before the arrival of paramedical personnel is associated with a significantly better neurological outcome in children with submersion injury.

to determine the variability and the natural course of children suffering from autosomal recessive osteopetrosis to allow optimal counseling and decision making with respect to therapeutic intervention. retrospective and longitudinal evaluation of clinical symptoms and natural course with emphasis on survival and sensoneurologic and hematologic findings. two large referral-based pediatric bone marrow transplantation units in europe. thirty-three patients with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis admitted to units in paris and leiden between 1972 and 1988 were analyzed until last follow-up or the time at which bone marrow transplantation was performed. the great number of patients and unprecedented amount of data make this report one of the single largest clinical studies on autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. ocular involvement occurring at a median age of 2 months was the symptom at initial examination in half of the patients. a striking variability between patients was found. retinal degeneration was present in three patients and associated generalized neurodegeneration was present in two. the probability of survival until the age of 6 years was about 30% for the group as a whole. the cumulative risk of developing visual or hematologic impairment in the first year of life was about 75% and leveled off afterward. patients with early hematologic impairment, ie, before 3 months of age, especially when combined with early visual impairment, had a very poor prognosis regarding life expectancy. autosomal recessive osteopetrosis seems to be a variable disorder with a poor prognosis, especially in children with early visual and hematologic impairment. allogenic bone marrow transplantation remains the only curative approach.

to examine the relationship between maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy and children's intellectual functioning during the first 4 years of life. prospective follow-up of participants in a randomized trial of pregnancy and infancy nurse home visitation. semi-rural community in upstate new york. 400 families in which the mothers registered before the 30th week of pregnancy and had no previous live births. eighty-five percent of the mothers were either teenagers (< 19 years at registration), unmarried, or poor. analysis limited to whites who comprised 89% of the sample. children in the comparison group whose mothers smoked 10 or more cigarettes per day during pregnancy had stanford-binet scores at 3 and 4 years of age that were 4.35 (95% ci: 0.02, 8.68) points lower (after controlling for a wide range of variables) than their counterparts whose mothers did not smoke during pregnancy. the results of this study add to the increasingly consistent evidence that maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy poses a unique risk for neurodevelopmental impairment among children and provide an additional reason for pregnant women not to smoke cigarettes.

the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) has recommended using a five-item questionnaire at every regular office visit for all children 6 to 72 months of age to identify those at risk of high-dose exposure to lead. to determine how well the questionnaire identifies children with elevated lead levels. comparison of results of the questionnaire, which is intended to identify children as being low-risk or high-risk for lead poisoning, with children's blood lead levels. a pediatric continuity clinic located in a major teaching hospital in rochester, ny. a consecutive sample of 476 children aged 6 to 72 months without a prior history of lead poisoning who were seen in the clinic in july and august 1992, and (for those aged < 36 months) or 12 months (for those aged 36 to 72 months). fingerstick lead samples were obtained from all children, and those > or = 15 micrograms/dl (0.72 mumol/l) were confirmed by subsequent venous lead determinations. twenty-eight percent had blood lead levels > or = 10 micrograms/dl (0.48 mumol/l), 8% had levels > or = 15 micrograms/dl (0.72 mumol/l), and 5% had lead levels > or = 20 micrograms/dl (0.96 mumol/l). according to responses on the questionnaire, 44% were initially classified as low-risk, and 43% were high-risk. in 13% risk could not be determined because one or more items on the questionnaire had not been answered or were answered equivocally, whereas all other items were answered "no." children for whom risk could not be determined were presumed to be at high risk and were added to that category, resulting in 56% of the study population so designated. the questionnaire was moderately effective in identifying children with elevated lead levels. seventy percent of children having lead levels > or = 10 micrograms/dl (0.48 mumol/l) and 82% of children having lead levels > or = 15 micrograms/dl (0.72 mumol/l) had been classified as high-risk by the questionnaire. children classified as low-risk were very unlikely to have elevated lead levels. eighty-one percent of low-risk children had lead levels < 10 ug/dl, and 97% had lead levels < 15 ul/dl. an abbreviated questionnaire using only the first three items from the cdc questionnaire had almost identical effectiveness. in this clinical setting, in which children are largely urban, poor, and have a moderate to high risk of developing elevated lead levels, the cdc risk assessment questionnaire is effective in identifying children with elevated lead burdens. however, an abbreviated version of the questionnaire may be as effective as the complete questionnaire. additional questions should be added to the questionnaire to improve its overall sensitivity, and the questionnaire should be tested in other settings to see if it is effective with children having different environmental exposures to lead.

to analyze the influence of a comprehensive program of nurse home visitation on the intellectual functioning of children born to women who smoked cigarettes during pregnancy. randomized clinical trial. treatment 1: sensory and developmental screening at ages 1 and 2 years; treatment 2: screening plus free transportation for prenatal and well-child care; treatment 3: screening, transportation, plus prenatal home visitation; treatment 4: screening, transportation, prenatal home visitation, plus postnatal home visitation through the children's second birthdays. semi-rural community in upstate new york. 400 families in which the mothers registered before the 30th week of pregnancy and had no previous live births. eighty-five percent of the mothers were either teenagers, unmarried, or poor. analysis was limited to whites, who constituted 89% of sample. nurse home visitation during pregnancy (treatments 3 and 4) or during pregnancy and the first 2 years of the child's life (treatment 4). during pregnancy, the nurses helped women improve their health-related behaviors, informal social support, and linkage with needed community services. children born to women who smoked 10 or more cigarettes per day at registration during pregnancy and who were assigned to treatments 3 and 4 had iqs (averaging across the 3rd and 4th years of life) that were 4.86 (95% ci: 0.47, 9.26) points higher after adjustment for covariates than did children born to women who smoked 10+ cigarettes per day and who were assigned to treatments 1 and 2. the positive influence of the home-visiting program on reducing the harmful effect of smoking appears to be due to prenatal visitation. comprehensive prenatal home-visitation services can offset the impairment in intellectual functioning associated with substantial maternal smoking during pregnancy.

the management of nonhemolytic hyperbilirubinemia in term newborns is controversial. to evaluate the usefulness of serum unbound bilirubin concentrations (ubcs) in the management of hyperbilirubinemia, we compared the concentrations with abnormal auditory brainstem responses (abrs). abrs and serum ubcs in 37 hyperbilirubinemic term newborns (total bilirubin concentrations [tbcs] > or = 20 mg/dl and direct bilirubin concentrations < 2 mg/dl) were measured before treatment with either phototherapy or exchange transfusions. eight of these newborns had blood incompatibilities. these hyperbilirubinemic newborns were divided into three groups according to the findings of abr: group a, normal abr (n = 18); group b, prolonged latency of wave i only (n = 8); and group c, prolonged interpeak latency of wave i-iii/i-v and/or poor amplitude (n = 11). the peak tbc was significantly different between groups a and c (22.8 +/- 2.2 mg/dl and 25.4 +/- 2.5 mg/dl, respectively; p < .05), though there were no differences between groups a and b and between groups b and c. the peak ubcs in groups b (1.27 +/- 0.7 micrograms/dl) and c (1.34 +/- 0.37 micrograms/dl) were significantly higher than in group a (0.78 +/- 0.26 microgram/dl) (p < .05 and p < .01, respectively), though there was no significant difference in the peak ubc between groups b and c. abnormal abr findings were more clearly associated with the level of ubc at 1.0 microgram/dl than that of tbc at 23 mg/dl by multiple logistic regression analysis (odds ratio = 16.6, p = .0026, vs 4.2, p = .1272). these results suggest that measuring ubc may help in evaluating the possible risk of bilirubin encephalopathy in full-term newborns when there is vigintiphobia (fear of 20).

little information relating to cholesterol levels and screening for hypercholesterolemia in inner-city children exists. for this study, given the disrupted family backgrounds of many of our patients and the unreliability of family histories, our hypothesis was that in comparison with other samples, family history of coronary heart disease would be a poor screening tool for the identification of children with elevations in total serum cholesterol (tsc). during 15 months, more than 400 pediatric outpatients, 2 through 14 years old, were screened for a family history of atherosclerotic disease. these children were attending a clinic serving a disadvantaged black and hispanic population at kings county hospital center. nonfasting tsc levels were measured in 300 children. positive risk for coronary heart disease was determined by the presence of a family history of coronary heart disease (defined as angina, stroke, or myocardial infarction in any parent or grandparent) at less than 55 years age. the mean tsc level was 4.27 mmol/l sd +/- 0.85) (165.0 mg/dl [sd +/- 32.8]). the 29.4% of this population with a history suggestive of high risk for hypercholesterolemia had a mean tsc of 4.48 mmol/l (sd +/- 0.971) (173.2 mg/dl [sd +/- 37.5]), and those with no risk history had a mean tsc of 4.18 mmol/l (sd +/- 0.750) (161.4 mg/dl [sd +/- 29.9]) (p < .005). use of family history of coronary artery disease as a screening tool had a sensitivity of 39.3%, a specificity of 74.5%, and a positive predictive value of 39.8% for detection of moderate hypercholesterolemia (tsc > or = 4.66 mmol/l [180 mg/dl]). this population's mean tsc level did not differ (p > .10) from those obtained in multiple large studies of average north american populations, and the predictive value and sensitivity of family history as a screening tool was comparable, although the prevalence of a positive family history was greater. the findings may be due to a greater prevalence of coronary artery disease at a young age in these families. in this population, a positive risk history is an important indicator for further evaluation of these children.

the ethical allocation of scarce resources is a major challenge for physicians working in the developing world. guidelines currently employed by health care workers in the developed world may be considered impractical or inappropriate in the "third world." to gain insight into the attitudes of doctors, nurses, and mothers of recent neonatal intensive care unit (nicu) survivors toward the utilization and withdrawal of life support in the context of a developing society. descriptive cohort study. thirty-three doctors, 20 nurses, and 70 mothers of recent nicu survivors. the cohort of mothers surveyed were predominantly unmarried, poorly educated, and either unemployed or still at school. in response to hypothetical scenarios, mothers exhibited very conservative attitudes toward withdrawal of life support compared to caregivers. only 2.9% (2/70) of mothers would contemplate any degree of life support withdrawal for infants with probable "moderate" handicap compared with 51.0% (26/51) of the medical staff. one mother (1.4%, 1/70) accepted the concept of withdrawal of life support where extremely poor outcome was anticipated, compared with 85% (45/53) of the caregivers. doctors and nurses exhibited very utilitarian attitudes toward nicu resource allocation, with emphasis directed toward avoidance of significant handicap. the majority of these caregivers considered the anticipated burden of the handicapped child in the society to be a major factor in the justification of their decision. the nonideal conditions under which doctors and nurses work in developing nations mandate resource allocation to be an integral component of nicu care.

the etiology and management of critical illness and injury in a pediatric emergency department were reviewed to survey the use of cardiopulmonary and trauma resuscitation and to compare these data with the educational content of pediatric advanced life support (pals) courses. the emergency department records of 183 patients treated in the cardiopulmonary/trauma resuscitation room of a pediatric emergency department over a 17-month period were reviewed for data on diagnosis, morbidity, presence of apnea or pulselessness, and utilization of several resuscitation skills: intubation, cardioversion, tibial interosseous line placement, and other resuscitation techniques. apneic and pulseless pediatric patients had poor survival (10.3%), but apneic patients had excellent survival (96.9%). endotracheal intubation (57.9%), bag-valve-mask ventilation (63.9%), and medications for rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia prior to endotracheal intubation (25.7%) were used frequently. inasmuch as asystole was the most common rhythm in pulseless patients, cardioversion and defibrillation were rarely used (2.2%). specialized vascular access techniques, tibial interosseous lines (24.0%), and femoral intravenous lines (19.7%), were used frequently in pediatric patients. the frequent use of airway management skills and the excellent survival of apneic pediatric patients supports the current emphasis on airway management in pals courses. cardioversion/defibrillation should receive less emphasis in pals courses. the frequent use of rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia prior to endotracheal intubation indicates that these techniques might warrant increased emphasis in the training of pediatric emergency department personnel and in pals courses.

though not well studied, extremely low birth weight (elbw; < 1000 g) appears to be a major risk factor for developmental disability, with most affected children experiencing school problems (40% to 64%) rather than severe handicap (25%). this study marks the first published us attempt to document prospectively the developmental/educational progress of a cohort of predominantly white, middle-class elbw children with randomly selected and matched heavier birth weight (1500 through 2500 g and > 2500 g) peer comparison groups. sixty elbw children and 60 peers were administered a test battery at age 4 years, including the mccarthy scales of children's abilities, peabody picture vocabulary test, and beery test of visual-motor integration. the elbw group mean scores were significantly lower than those of the peer groups on every measure, although generally still within 1 sd of the test mean. twenty-three percent were clearly disabled; 26% had optimal development, having attained at least average scores on all measures; and 51% attained borderline scores globally or had an average cognitive score, but specifically poor performance in one or more areas. comparison groups were 2 1/2 times more likely to have optimal development and had mean cognitive scores 15 to 18 points higher than the elbw group. in summary, weaker performance on all measures exists prior to school entry among nondisabled elbw children compared with their peers. it is unclear whether these data portend emerging school-based disabilities or describe a continuing recovery process to be completed in middle childhood. continued follow-up of this cohort at 7 and 10 years of age will address these questions.

previous case-control or cross-sectional studies have provided conflicting results about whether children of teenage mothers are at increased risk of maltreatment compared with children of older mothers. this study is the first to examine this question using a longitudinal, cohort design and the first to address important methodologic issues such as detection bias. subjects were 219 consecutive index children born to inner-city women who were 18 years or younger and 219 sociodemographically similar comparison children born to women 19 years or older. data were collected by reviewing the medical records of each child through the fifth birthday. three outcomes were examined: maltreatment, poor growth, and a change in the child's primary caretaker. maltreatment was ascertained by having two experts, one of whom was blind to the group status, review each injury documented in the records. predefined criteria were used to distinguish unintentional injuries from maltreatment (abuse, neglect, or sexual abuse). maltreatment occurred more frequently in the children of young mothers (12.8%) than in the comparison group (6.4%) (risk ratio [rr] = 2.00; 95% confidence interval [ci] = 1.17, 3.64). poor growth, defined by growth criteria, occurred in 6.9% of the index group and in 4.1% of comparison children (rr = 1.67; 95% ci = 0.75, 3.73). a change in the child's primary caretaker, either because of placement in foster care or because the mother left the home, occurred in 12.8% of the index group and in 3.2% in comparison children (rr = 4.00; 95% ci = 1.80, 8.87).(abstract truncated at 250 words)

an evaluation of a large pediatric residency program by its alumni was undertaken to determine whether the program is providing quality education and relevant training for pediatricians. a questionnaire was mailed to physicians who began their training at children's hospital medical center in july 1974 or later and finished prior to july 1990. of the 372 questionnaires sent, 274 were returned (74% response rate). current positions included primary care physicians (41%), academic pediatricians (33%), and other (26%). fifty-seven percent pursued fellowship training. overall, 94% of the responders believed that their pediatric training was adequate in preparing them for their current position. the variety of patients seen, the inpatient experience, resident camaraderie, and neonatology training were rated the highest quality, means 4.38 to 4.75 (1 = poor, 3 = average, 5 = excellent quality). behavioral/developmental pediatrics, adolescent medicine, well-child care/continuity clinic, the outpatient experience, and pediatric surgery were rated the poorest quality, means 2.66 to 3.08, and judged to have too little quantity of training relative to the other aspects of training, means 1.93 to 2.42 (1 = too little, 3 = just enough, 5 = too much quantity). the quantity of neonatology training, the volume of patients, on-call experience, subspecialty inpatient services, such as bone marrow transplantation, and overall inpatient experience were considered too high relative to other components, means 3.51 to 4.08. there were no significant differences in responses by whether the alumni were in academic or primary care positions nor by year of training, and few differences by whether or not the training was considered adequate preparation for their current position.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

this study of the medicaid program analyzes changes in child recipients, costs, and service use during the 1980s to assess the effects of recent federal policy shifts and to project future costs for children. data presented in this study are from the health care financing administration's medicaid statistical report for the years 1979, 1985, and 1990, three time-points that demarcate major federal policy shifts. about half of all recipients added to the medicaid program during the last decade were children; they comprised 14% of the total cost growth experienced by the program. in addition, the eligibility distribution of children receiving medicaid shifted markedly over the last decade. in 1979, children receiving cash assistance comprised 90% of total child recipients; by 1990, this figure dropped to 72%. future expansions to the medicaid program are projected to cost less than the initial expansions. this is because the early expansions disproportionately served infants, who require more hospital services than older children. despite the major changes in medicaid eligibility for children during the 1980s, only limited cost shifts occurred in expenditures for children. children continue to consume a small portion of the medicaid budget. congress should explore options for guaranteeing that their share of funding for services will be adequate. moreover, since future expansions will be far less expensive than those already implemented, accelerating the phase-in process for all poor children may be a more financially feasible policy option than many policymakers anticipate, despite the fiscal hardships facing many states.

hispanic children represent a large and growing segment of the poor and disadvantaged children in our country. asthma and other chronic respiratory diseases have a significant impact on poor children. yet there are few descriptions of the specific morbidities and barriers to health that hispanic children with asthma encounter, and data on predictors of morbidity among these children are unavailable. the purpose of this study is to describe the morbidity associated with asthma in hispanic children and to identify factors that predict morbidity. a group of hispanic children with moderate asthma followed in the clinics of the university of texas health science center at san antonio were studied. children aged 6 to 16 years with at least two acute-care visits or one hospitalization for asthma during the previous year were enrolled. data sources included standardized questionnaires, spirometry, medical records, and school attendance records. seventy-eight hispanic children were enrolled in the study (mean age = 9.4 +/- 2.7 [sd]; 62% male). fifty-two (67%) of children had been hospitalized previously. the other morbidity variables (mean +/- sd) were number of days/week impaired (1.1 +/- 1.2), number of days absent from school per year (13 +/- 9.6), number of acute-care visits per year (3.3 +/- 2.4), and number of hospital admissions per year (0.6 +/- 0.8). the mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity was 79.3% (+/- 9.1) and the mean forced expiratory flow, mid-expiratory phase, percent predicted was 69.9% (+/- 25.1). thirty-four children (44%) were exposed to cigarette smoke in the home.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

data from the 1988 national health interview survey on child health showed that 4.3% of all children younger than 17 years of age had asthma, with poor children demonstrating a slightly greater prevalence than nonpoor (4.8 poor vs 4.2 nonpoor). this poor/nonpoor differential was even greater for children younger than 6 years old (4.2 vs 3.1). poor children were also more likely to have had more than 7 bed days in the past year because of their asthma. measures of health service utilization showed that poor children had 40% fewer doctor visits (3.2 vs 5.4) and had 40% more hospitalizations in the previous year (10.6% vs 7.4%). although more than 90% of all children had a usual source of routine and/or sick care, poor children were more likely to receive routine care in a neighborhood health center (15.1% vs 1.6%) or hospital-based clinic (11.1% vs 2.8%) than in a doctor's office (67.2% vs 91.1%) and, when sick, then were more than four times more likely to report an emergency department as a usual source of care (8.1% vs 1.7%). diminished accessibility to appropriate outpatient health services for poor children with asthma was associated with increased morbidity, measured by hospitalization, and bed days. these findings have significant implications for the development of comprehensive models of care and the potential role that community clinics could play with increased funding as a result of medicaid changes that were instituted as part of the 1989 omnibus budget reconciliation act.

data from the 1988 us national health interview survey on child health, a nationally representative cross-sectional survey, were used to determine national estimates of school outcomes (grade failure, learning disabilities, and suspension/expulsion) and mean number of absences for children with asthma (cwa) compared to well children without current health conditions. families indicated that 536 (4.9%) of the 10,362 survey children in grades 1 through 12 had had asthma in the previous 12 months. families reported 18% of cwa vs 15% of well children had grade failure, 9% of cwa vs 5% of well children had learning disabilities, and 5% of cwa vs 6% of well children had been expelled or suspended. children with asthma averaged 7.6 school days absent compared with 2.5 days for the well group. multiple logistic regression was used to compare the odds of grade failure, learning disabilities, and suspension/expulsion among cwa and well children, overall and stratified by income. similar methods were used to assess the role of health status among asthmatic children. after adjustment for demographic factors, cwa had similar risks of grade failure and suspension/expulsion, but 1.7 times the risk of learning disability compared with well children. also, among families with incomes below $20,000, cwa had twice the odds of grade failure compared with well children. for asthmatic children, reported health status was an important predictor of learning disability. ten percent of cwa were reported to be in fair-poor health. after adjustment for demographic factors, those in fair-poor health were twice as likely to have a reported learning disability compared with those in good-excellent health.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

fewer than 10% of children with moderate or severe asthma receive an annual influenza vaccination despite their heightened susceptibility to severe infections and recommendations by the american academy of pediatrics and the immunization practices advisory committee that all such children be vaccinated annually. patient, provider, and system factors leading to this poor vaccination rate are not well understood. this study tested the effectiveness of a computerized reminder system in improving influenza vaccination rates in children with asthma and examined patient barriers to vaccination at one pediatric clinic in an urban teaching hospital. a computer database identified 124 children with moderate or severe asthma. patients were randomly assigned either to study group (n = 63), who were sent a personalized letter reminder about the need for an influenza vaccination, or to a control group (n = 61), who received no reminder. study group mothers were interviewed 2 months after the letter was sent to assess factors associated with receipt of vaccination, including demographic features, parental worry about asthma and vaccine side effects, the four dimensions of the health belief model, and health locus of control beliefs. nineteen study group patients (30%) received an influenza vaccination, compared with only 4 control patients (7%) (p < .01). forty-three mothers of children in the study group were interviewed; 14 (33%) of these children had received the vaccination. of the characteristics investigated, two significantly correlated with vaccination compliance: high levels of parental worry about asthma (positively correlated: odds ratio = 23.3, p < .01) and high levels of parental worry about vaccine side effects (negatively correlated: odds ratio = 0.087, p = .025).(abstract truncated at 250 words)

data from the national health interview survey reveal that 4.7 million or 15% of us adolescents aged 10 through 18 were uninsured in 1989. among adolescents, 73% were privately insured, 10% were publicly insured, and 2% were both privately and publicly insured. poor, near-poor, and minority adolescents were at the greatest risk for lack of health insurance coverage. among adolescents without insurance, cost continued to be cited as the leading barrier to obtaining coverage. a comparison of 1989 national health interview survey data with a previous analysis, in which 1984 data were used, revealed a 10% increase in the proportion of adolescents without insurance coverage. the increase in the proportion of uninsured adolescents was entirely attributable to an erosion of private health insurance coverage. no significant change occurred in the proportion of adolescents with coverage under public programs. planned expansions of the federally and state-financed medicaid programs will help to stem further increases in the size of the uninsured adolescent population. however, unless marked improvements occur in the private health insurance sector, progress will be limited.

this study was designed to determine whether day care center attendance was associated with increased risk of diarrheal disease among poor children in an urban, developing country setting. from july 17 to december 18, 1988, mothers of 493 colombian children less than 5 years old (241 attendees and 252 nonattendees) were interviewed weekly about diarrheal events during the previous week. the incidence of diarrhea was greater for day care center attendees than for nonattendees (3.2 vs 2.0 episodes per child-year, p < .0005). for children less than 2 years of age, attendees experienced 7.2 episodes/child-year vs 3.5 episodes per child-year for nonattendees (p < .0005). analyses controlling for water source and availability, excreta disposal, socioeconomic status, and duration of follow-up showed that the increased diarrheal risk was limited to children younger than 3 years of age spending more than 30 hours per week in the centers. in addition, although the risk among attendees of suffering diarrheal episodes of longer duration was fairly constant across levels of socioeconomic status, this risk was inversely proportional to socioeconomic status for nonattendees. in summary, the increase in risk of diarrhea among young, full-time day care attendees was modest, yet important, because diarrhea continues to be a major cause of morbidity and mortality in colombian children.

while access to care has been shown to be worse for poor populations, few studies have examined the quality of care received by the poor vs the nonpoor. furthermore, serious concerns have been raised about the impact of cost-containment efforts on the quality of health care for both the poor and nonpoor. the authors examine the interpersonal quality of medical care received by children from poor and nonpoor families by assessing parental satisfaction with physician-patient communication in a telephone survey of a nationally representative sample of households containing 2182 children and adolescents 17 years or younger. the majority of parents were satisfied with many aspects of their interactions with physicians. however, poor families were more likely to be not completely satisfied with the medical care their children received at their last health visit than nonpoor families (27% vs 12%, p less than .001). with regard to specific aspects of the physician-patient communication, poor families were more likely to be not satisfied with the physician's provision of information about the illness (40% vs 21%, p greater than .001); the physician's discussion of examination findings (21% vs 9%, p less than .001); and the opportunity provided by the physician to express their concerns (12% vs 6%, p less than .001). logistic regression demonstrated that poor patients were approximately twice as likely to be not satisfied with the medical encounter and with various aspects of their communication with the physician. it is concluded that the parents of poor children are less satisfied with their care. both policy and educational interventions may be needed to address this problem.

as part of a large, multicenter study of newborn cry analysis and sudden infant death syndrome, we examined the effects of in utero cocaine exposure on ten acoustical cry characteristics. newborn cry recording and medical record review was performed for 23,948 newborns. cocaine use during pregnancy (determined by record review) was identified in 438 (1.8%) women (310 by self-report only; 128 newborns also had positive urine assay). a demographically similar group of 373 newborns, selected from the 23,510 newborns without known cocaine exposure, made up the comparison group. cry analysis was technically possible for 768 recordings: 404 cocaine-exposed and 364 non-exposed controls. comparison of cocaine-exposed vs control newborns, after adjustment for potential confounding variables, found significant differences including: fewer cry utterances (p = .001), more short cries (p = .02), and less crying in the hyperphonation mode (p = .01), for the cocaine-exposed neonates. as reported in other studies, cocaine-exposed newborns also were significantly lower in birth weight, length, and head circumference. newborns who had positive urine tests for cocaine suffered the greatest effects on both cry and growth parameters. these findings suggest a pattern of underaroused neurobehavioral function and are consistent with the emerging picture of the adverse neurobehavioral effects of cocaine. developmental outcome studies are in progress to determine if acoustical analysis of the newborn cry can be used to identify cocaine-exposed newborns who are at highest risk for poor outcome.

the pediatrician is faced with a difficult challenge in providing recommendations for optimal nutrition in older infants. because the milk (or formula) portion of the diet represents 35% to 100% of total daily calories and because wcm and breast milk or infant formula differ markedly in composition, the selection of a milk or formula has a great impact on nutrient intake. infants fed wcm have low intakes of iron, linoleic acid, and vitamin e, and excessive intakes of sodium, potassium, and protein, illustrating the poor nutritional compatibility of solid foods and wcm. these nutrient intakes are not optimal and may result in altered nutritional status, with the most dramatic effect on iron status. infants fed iron-fortified formula or breast milk for the first 12 months of life generally maintain normal iron status. no studies have concluded that the introduction of wcm into the diet at 6 months of age produces adequate iron status in later infancy; however, recent studies have demonstrated that iron status is significantly impaired when wcm is introduced into the diet of 6-month-old infants. data from studies abroad of highly iron-deficient infant populations suggest that infants fed partially modified milk formulas with supplemental iron in a highly bioavailable form (ferrous sulfate) may maintain adequate iron status. however, these studies do not address the overall nutritional adequacy of the infant's diet. such formulas have not been studied in the united states. optimal nutrition of the infant involves selecting the appropriate milk source and eventually introducing infant solid foods.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

one hundred twenty-seven children (83 males, 44 females, 86 white, 41 nonwhite; mean age 12.1 years) who received 160 renal transplants between 1980 and 1989 were retrospectively studied. variables such as age, sex, primary diagnosis, type, hla-dr mismatching, and repeated transplants were compared between races and found not to be significant. however, hla-a and -b cadaveric-graft mismatching, which was equivalent between whites and nonwhites prior to 1985 (pre-cyclosporine a era), has significantly favored whites (49% with 0 to 2 hla-a and -b mismatch vs 16% in nonwhites) since 1985 (p less than .05), and a significantly higher proportion of nonwhite patients (59%) were receiving medical assistance (p less than .0001). graft survival was evaluated with significantly poorer results in nonwhites as compared to whites (p less than .05). although no difference was found between white and nonwhite cadaveric-graft survival before 1985, nonwhites had significantly worse graft survival since 1985 (72% vs 59% for 1 year and 61% vs 24% for 3 years in whites and nonwhites, respectively; p less than .05). subpopulations such as nonwhite adolescents, nonwhite females, nonwhites with repeated transplants, and all low socioeconomic patients were identified as high-risk children with poor long-term survival. it is concluded that secondary to poorer matching since 1985 there has been decreased graft survival in nonwhites despite cyclosporine a. attempts to improve matching and attention to high-risk groups are needed for equivalent survival.

this study was conducted to determine whether changes in the levels of plasma apolipoproteins (apo) a-i, a-ii, b, c-ii, and c-iii, along with cholesterol and triglycerides, could provide additional information on these parameters in relation to the control of glycemia. plasma and lipoprotein lipids and apolipoprotein levels were measured in 123 insulin-dependent diabetic children (4- to 12-years-old), classified into good, fair, and poor diabetic control based on hba1c and fructosamine levels, and in 62 comparable healthy controls. total cholesterol, very low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and low density lipoprotein cholesterol, as well as total triglycerides, very low density lipoprotein, low density lipoprotein, and high density lipoprotein (hdl) triglycerides, and apo b and apo c-iii were increased significantly in children with fair and poor diabetic control. while in diabetic children with good control, only very low density lipoprotein cholesterol was elevated significantly compared with healthy control subjects. conversely, the levels of cholesterol in hdl, hdl2, hdl3, and apo a-i were decreased significantly in the three diabetic groups, but apo a-ii and apo c-ii did not change. we conclude that in children with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, abnormalities in plasma lipid, lipoprotein, and apolipoprotein levels occur, the extent of which depends on the degree (extent) of glycemic control (the poorer the control the more substantial the abnormality). we suggest that measurement of apo c-iii level along with apo b and apo a-i in these patients may be a sensitive indicator to alterations in glycemic control.

to evaluate the usefulness of preoperative screening for coagulation disorders in children, we prospectively studied laboratory and bleeding histories in 1603 children undergoing tonsillectomy. all patients had preoperative laboratory screening with a complete blood count, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and bleeding time. persistent abnormalities on repeat testing 1 week later were investigated further by a standardized schema. a subset of 129 patients, including all those who bled perioperatively or had laboratory abnormalities, completed a standard historical questionnaire. thirteen patients had persistent laboratory abnormalities diagnostic of lupus inhibitor (5), non-lupus inhibitor (6), mild hemophilia a (1), and vonwillebrand disease (1). two patients had persistently prolonged activated partial thromboplastin times of undefined cause. fourteen patients (10.8%) interviewed reported positive bleeding histories. of these, five, including the patient with vonwillebrand disease, had persistent laboratory abnormalities. history alone failed to detect the patient with hemophilia a. for patients with inhibitors or prolonged activated partial thromboplastin times of unknown cause, surgery was delayed until the coagulation abnormalities resolved, and there was no perioperative bleeding. the patient with vonwillebrand disease had severe postoperative bleeding despite treatment with cryoprecipitate. in predicting perioperative bleeding, history and laboratory screening had a high specificity but a very low positive predictive value due to poor sensitivity and a low prevalence of bleeding. some children with bleeding disorders may be identified first during routine preoperative coagulation testing, and replacement therapy or delay or cancellation of surgery may reduce or prevent perioperative hemorrhage. however, the large number of false positive laboratory tests and bleeding histories, coupled with the relative rarity of inherited and acquired coagulopathies, raises doubts about the overall value of routine screening.

the fragile x syndrome, a common x-linked form of mental retardation and autism, affects females as well as males. previous work has shown that approximately 35% of heterozygotes (women who carry the fragile x gene) demonstrate cognitive impairment. thirty-two girls, 18 years or younger, who demonstrate the fragile x chromosome were evaluated and compared with 19 sisters who do not demonstrate the fragile x chromosome. evaluations included a physical examination, behavioral assessment, and intelligence testing. significant differences (in intellectual, behavioral, and physical features) were seen between the two groups. twenty-five percent of fragile x-positive girls had an iq in the mentally retarded range (iq less than 70) and 28% had an iq in the borderline range (70 to 84). prominent ears, shyness, and poor eye contact were significant findings in fragile x-positive girls compared with fragile x-negative girls. thirty-one percent of the fragile x-positive girls had significant attentional difficulties and most of these girls were successfully treated with stimulant medication. the majority of fragile x-positive girls in this study demonstrated significant behavioral and developmental problems which required identification and appropriate treatment. pediatricians and health care providers should be aware of the frequency and manner with which fragile x affects females in order to initiate cytogenetic studies and treatment when indicated.

studies of developmental outcome of neonatal intensive care unit graduates have generally been limited to the first 2 to 3 years of life, with outcome determined by psychometric tests. this study followed neonatal intensive care unit graduates born 1975 through 1983 (n = 457) into the public school system and compared their educational outcomes with those of newborn nursery graduates (n = 656). outcomes were evaluated by placement in four academic categories: regular classroom, academic problems, speech/language impairment, and major impairment. educational outcomes for children of both groups were essentially the same. their placement in the four academic categories were equally affected by nonmedical variables, primarily income (below/above poverty level), race, and sex. seventy percent of poverty-level children were in one of the three problem categories, compared with 40% of children above poverty level. neither neonatal intensive care unit treatment nor low birth weight were major predictors of educational outcome. the only clear-cut neonatal intensive care unit effect occurred among children born with sensory or physical impairments. therefore, in order to reduce poor educational outcomes, follow-up and intervention programs should be targeted primarily to children with diagnosable handicaps and from minority, low-income families.

a survey of 220 adolescents attending a multiphysician pediatric office in virginia was conducted to determine the frequency with which they used sunscreens. eighty-one percent of the teenagers in the study stated that they spent most weekends in the sun; however, only 9% always used sunscreen, while 33% never did. factors found to be associated with increased sunscreen use included female sex (odds ratio = 4.5, p less than .0001), having a best friend who routinely used sunscreen (odds ratio = 3.0, p less than .001), having parents who insisted on sunscreen use when the teenagers were children (odds ratio = 3.0, p = .006), and knowing that the maximum time for safe exposure to the sun is short (odds ratio = 6.2, p less than .0001). adolescents with a history of skin cancer in the family were not more likely to use sunscreens than other teenagers. thirty-three percent of the girls and 16% of the boys older than 15 years of age reported that they had visited a tanning salon at least once. this survey substantiates poor compliance with sunscreen use by teenagers despite increasing evidence of the dangers of excessive sun exposure.

data are presented suggesting that neuroblastoma represents at least two distinct clinical-biologic entities. one, favorable neuroblastoma, is associated with young age and early stage at diagnosis, triploid karyotypes, no 1p abnormalities or n-myc gene amplification, more mature catecholamine synthesis and excretion, and excellent clinical outcome despite no or minimal therapy. the other, unfavorable neuroblastoma, is associated with older age and advanced stage, pseudodiploid karyotypes and 1p deletions, n-myc oncogene amplification, less mature catecholamine synthesis and excretion, and poor outcome despite aggressive multimodality therapy including bone marrow transplantation. favorable neuroblastomas rarely, if ever, evolve into unfavorable disease. unresolved issues regarding this hypothesis and implications for the efficacy of preclinical detection through mass screening are discussed.

creatine kinase brain isoenzyme (ck-bb) was determined in cerebrospinal fluid of 150 neonates by a newly developed immunoenzymatic assay. newborns with a documented neurologic disorder (intraventricular hemorrhage, postasphyxial encephalopathy, central nervous system infection, or persistent periventricular intraparenchymal echodensities) showed markedly higher concentrations of immunoreactive ck-bb than did the normal newborns or those with subarachnoid hemorrhage. in neonates with seizures the data suggest that the underlying neurologic disorder accounts for the higher ck-bb values and not the seizures per se. high concentrations of ck-bb in the neonatal period were followed by poor short-term outcome.

this study examined the impact of low birth weight on children's health and assessed the influence of the social environment on various aspects of health in low birth weight and normal birth weight children. data on 8661 children aged 2 through 11 from the 1981 child health supplement of the national health interview survey provided strong evidence for two major conclusions: (1) low birth weight children in high-risk social environments are at increased for poor health outcomes compared with comparable normal birth weight children. this vulnerability was found across all age groups, suggesting that the effects of low birth weight are long-lasting. the poor health outcomes for low birth weight children in high-risk social environments were found for all seven aspects of child health status studied: excessive bed days, restricted-activity days, and school-loss days; school failure, low school-ranking, behavior problems, and maternal perception of child health status as fair/poor. (2) the mechanism of risk was complex and differed by birth weight group. whereas certain combinations of individual risk factors protected normal birth weight children from several adverse outcomes, none for low birth weight children were identified. however, low birth weight children in low- or moderate-risk social environments were not at greater risk for poor outcomes compared with comparable normal birth weight children. this study underscores the importance of a healthy social environment for children who are already at high risk for poor health outcomes by virtue of being low birth weight.

nutritional dwarfing refers to a condition in which maladaptive eating patterns play a primary role in poor linear growth and delayed pubertal development. the present controlled study assesses whether nutritionally dwarfed children and adolescents differ in their psychosocial adjustment from healthy children and adolescents of comparable height in ways that might account for their undernutrition. children with nutritional dwarfing (n = 16) were compared by standardized questionnaires with a short-stature (ie, heights below the fifth percentile) control group composed of children and adolescents with constitutional growth delay and/or familial short stature (n = 31). scores on a self-report screening questionnaire for eating disorders did not differentiate the groups. moreover, the vast majority of nutritionally dwarfed patients expressed a desire to have a heavier physical appearance. whereas the groups were generally similar in self-perceptions of domain-specific competencies and positive psychosocial adjustment, the parents of nutritionally dwarfed children reported that their children showed significantly fewer externalized behavior problems. these findings suggest the existence of an eating disturbance that compromises growth in childhood and/or adolescence which, unlike anorexia nervosa, is not associated with evidence of psychopathology.

a survey measuring acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids)-related behaviors and selected psychosocial factors was administered to 1091 tenth grade students residing in or near an aids epicenter. the purpose of the survey was to identify salient risk factors that could be targeted in aids prevention programs. by 15 years of age, one quarter of students reported engaging in behaviors that placed them at higher risk for acquiring infection with human immunodeficiency virus, and 3% of students reported engaging in very high-risk behaviors. students exposed to certain psychosocial stressors (ie, adverse life circumstances and poor parental support), who engaged in other problem behaviors (ie, substance use and academic problems) and who had higher self-esteem, were more likely to engage in higher risk behaviors. pediatricians and other clinicians, particularly those working in or near aids epicenters, who encounter adolescents with multiple psychosocial problems, should be alert to the possibility that these youths also are engaging in behaviors that place them at risk for aids. comprehensive care for these teenagers must include an assessment of involvement in aids-risk behaviors and appropriate behavioral counseling.

parents of 217 chronically ill children and adolescents were surveyed concerning their opinions about disclosing medical information to schools. the sample consisted of parents of more than one third of the children and adolescents meeting inclusion criteria who were seen at a university-based pediatric clinic during a 10-week period. parents were asked (1) whether schools need information about 16 health items, (2) who in the school should know, and (3) who should provide this information. parents' willingness to disclose information was compared with family and child demographic data. parents strongly believed that (1) teachers need to be informed and (2) parents should be the primary informers. the consensus that schools need information did not vary with family and child demographics. however, parents of children with poor illness prognosis, greater likelihood of emergencies, and visible illnesses were more supportive of disclosure. most parents indicated that physicians should provide information on 10 of the 16 items. physicians were viewed as particularly appropriate informers about recognizing emergencies and medication effects. only 21% of the parents were aware of any prior contact between the medical care giver and the school concerning their child's illness. thus, parents want schools informed and believe physicians should be involved in providing information.

erythrocyte protoporphyrin (ep) was introduced in the 1970s as an inexpensive screening test for lead poisoning. as greater knowledge of lead poisoning has accumulated, the recommended ep level at which further evaluation for lead poisoning should be initiated has been lowered from greater than or equal to 50 micrograms/dl to greater than or equal to 35 micrograms/dl. the purpose of this study was to evaluate the utility of this ep threshold. a receiver operator characteristic curve was constructed to assess the relationship between the true-positive rate and false-positive rate of ep at various decision thresholds. the receiver operator characteristic curve was constructed with data from the second national health and nutrition examination survey from 1976 to 1980, which included 2673 children 6 years of age or younger who had both blood lead and ep level determinations. decision analysis was then used to determine the optimal ep decision threshold for detecting a blood lead level greater than or equal to 25 micrograms/dl. the receiver operator characteristic curve demonstrated that ep is a poor predictor of a blood lead level greater than or equal to 25 micrograms/dl. at the currently recommended ep decision threshold of 35 micrograms/dl, the true-positive rates and false-positive rates of ep are 0.23 and 0.04, respectively. as a result of the inadequate performance of ep screening for lead poisoning, when the prevalence of lead poisoning is greater than 8%, there is no ep decision threshold that optimizes the relationship between the cost of screening normal children and the benefit of detecting lead-poisoned children. erythrocyte protoporphyrin measurement is not sufficiently sensitive to be recommended uniformly as a screening test for lead poisoning.

to explore the social adjustment and peer relationships of children with tourette's disorder, 29 patients with mild to moderate tourette's disorder were studied. children underwent neuropsychological testing. the patients completed self-esteem scales and their parents and teachers completed behavior rating scales. peer relationships were examined with the pupil evaluation inventory, which is a sociometric questionnaire completed by the child's classmates and provides measures of aggression, withdrawal, and likability. as a group, tourette's disorder patients were significantly more withdrawn, more aggressive, and less popular than their classmates. thirty-five percent of the children with tourette's disorder received the lowest rating in the class on one or more of the pupil evaluation inventory factors. these social problems were not predicted by the frequency or duration of tics. a clinical diagnosis of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and teachers' ratings on the summary scale of the child behavior checklist and the pupil evaluation inventory did predict poor adjustment. it is concluded that social adjustment is a major difficulty for many children with tourette's disorder, irrespective of tic severity.

vaginal bleeding early in pregnancy may be mistaken for menstrual bleeding and delay entry into prenatal care by delaying the diagnosis of pregnancy. this study tests the hypotheses that (1) more adolescents report early first-trimester vaginal bleeding than do adults and (2) a history of vaginal bleeding is associated with later entry into prenatal care, particularly among adolescents. reports of early vaginal bleeding were prospectively obtained from black, predominantly primiparous, unmarried poor women (136 adolescents and 53 adults). as hypothesized, more adolescents reported early first-trimester vaginal bleeding than did adults (16.9% vs 5.7%; p less than .01). adolescents who reported early vaginal bleeding also entered prenatal care later (16.2 weeks) than did adolescents who reported no bleeding (12.7 weeks) (p less than .03); this was not true for adults. if dating of the gestation is based solely on last menstrual period history, inflation of the incidence of preterm births to adolescents and the mean birth weights of those preterm neonates may occur. the findings suggest that new strategies focusing on the recognition of menstrual irregularities as a symptom of pregnancy may be needed to promote early prenatal care among adolescents. additionally, adolescent pregnancies should be dated by both ultrasound and dubowitz examinations.

ordinarily, severe disease due to acquired cytomegalovirus (cmv) infection does not occur in immunocompetent children. we describe a previously healthy boy who acquired primary cmv infection at approximately 2 years of age and experienced a 2-year-long debilitating multisystem illness from which he ultimately recovered. clinical features of this illness included fatigue, poor weight gain, pallor, unexplained fever, musculoskeletal complaints, drenching night sweats, lymphadenopathy, and massive hepatosplenomegaly. laboratory abnormalities included elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lymphocytosis, and elevated immune complex levels. cellular immune function was impaired during the illness but was demonstrably normal during convalescence, and there was no other evidence for a known immunodeficiency state. immunoblot analysis showed enhanced antibody response to a 66-kd infected cell protein after symptomatic recovery. despite consistently normal indices of hepatic function, liver enlargement persisted after other symptoms had resolved. liver biopsy demonstrated a mononuclear cell portal tract infiltrate with fibrosis, but cmv could not be demonstrated directly in this tissue. primary cmv infection has not been reported previously to cause the persistent symptoms seen in this child.

sixty-one patients with chronic sinusitis who were referred for an allergy evaluation were evaluated for immunologic competence including assessment of quantitative serum immunoglobulin levels, igg subclass levels, and response to pneumococcal and haemophilus influenzae vaccines. in addition to chronic sinus disease, recurrent otitis media and asthma exacerbation were common problems in this group. five patients had an elevated age-adjusted ige level and 22 patients had positive prick tests to one or more environmental inhalants; these findings suggest an allergic component in this subgroup. twelve additional patients had highly reactive intradermal tests to common environmental allergens, which also may be clinically significant for underlying atopy. eleven patients had low immunoglobulin levels, 6 had low immunoglobulin levels and vaccine hyporesponsiveness, and 17 had poor vaccine response only. thus, 34 of 61 patients with refractory sinusitis had abnormal results on immune studies, with depressed igg3 levels and poor response to pneumococcal antigen 7 being most common. in addition to allergy, immunologic incompetence may be an important etiologic factor in patients with chronic, refractory sinusitis.

phase-modulated rotating frame imaging is a modification of magnetic resonance spectroscopy, which uses a linear radiofrequency field gradient to obtain spatially localized biochemical information. phase-modulated rotating frame imaging was used to study regional cerebral energy metabolism in the brains of 9 normal newborns and 25 newborns after birth asphyxia. relative concentrations of phosphorus-containing metabolites and intracellular ph were determined for brain tissue at three specified depths below the brain surface for all neonates. wide variations in metabolite ratios were seen among normal neonates, and considerable metabolic heterogeneity was demonstrated in individual neonates by depth-resolved spectroscopy. asphyxiated neonates with severe hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and a poor neurodevelopmental outcome showed the expected rise in inorganic orthophosphate and fall in phosphocreatine concentrations in both global and spatially localized spectra. phase-modulated rotating frame imaging showed that metabolic derangement was less in superficial than in deeper brain tissue. the inorganic orthophosphate-adenosine triphosphate ratio from 1 to 2 cm below the brain surface was more accurate than any global metabolite ratio for the identification of neonates with a poor short-term outcome. these data are consistent with the known vulnerability of subcortical brain tissue to hypoxic-ischemic injury in the full-term neonate.

marfan syndrome is infrequently diagnosed early in infancy. the experience of the authors with 22 severely affected infants diagnosed as having marfan syndrome in the first 3 months of life is described and the literature on 32 additional infants with marfan syndrome is reviewed. it was found that serious cardiac pathology (82% of the patients described in the article, 94% of those described in the literature) may be present at birth, and that congenital contractures (64% of our cases, 47% of literature cases) are often an associated finding. other useful clinical findings included arachnodactyly, dolichocephaly, a characteristic facies, a high-arched palate, micrognathia, hyperextensible joints, pes planus, anterior chest deformity, iridodenesis, megalocornea, and dislocated lenses. echocardiography was useful as a noninvasive method for defining the extent of cardiovascular involvement and following its course. characteristic cardiac findings in early life included mitral valve prolapse, valvular regurgitation, and aortic root dilation. cardiac function ranged from normal to poor, with a tendency to worsen. of the 22 cases 3 infants died during the first year of life. morbidity and mortality may be high when marfan syndrome is diagnosed during infancy, and prompt recognition of this phenotype can facilitate management and counseling. most such severe cases appear to be due to a sporadic mutation in a single germ cell of one parent. many familial cases may have milder manifestations, be more difficult to detect during infancy, and have a better prognosis.

homeless children in families are increasing in numbers across the country and have been noted to have frequent health problems. the health status of homeless children was assessed on multiple dimensions through parental report in a survey conducted with 196 homeless families in 10 shelters in los angeles and 194 housed poor families after march 1987 through january 1988. during the month before the survey, the homeless and housed poor children experienced high rates of illness symptoms, disability, and bed days. homeless and housed poor children were frequently rated by their parents to be in fair or poor health (17% vs 13%, p = .14). homeless children, however, were reported to have more behavior problems and school failure [30% vs 18%, p = .06] than housed poor children. homeless children also had high rates of other health problems such as developmental delay (9%) and overweight (13%). the diets of homeless children were frequently imbalanced, dependent on food from "fast-food" restaurants, and characterized by repeated periods of deprivation. family problems were more common among homeless families, especially among single-parent homeless families compared with single-parent housed families (spousal abuse, 68% vs 41%, p less than .01; parental drug and alcohol abuse, 60% vs 39%, p less than .01). it is concluded that homeless children have significant child behavior and developmental problems and disorders of nutrition and growth, which are associated with multiple risk factors in their environment.

many factors are associated with low breast-feeding rates among black low-income women. this study examines whether, despite such factors, health professionals' prenatal education of black poor women is associated with increased breast-feeding rates. black women born in the united states who attended a midwives prenatal clinic (n = 159) were randomly assigned to two types of prenatal education or were followed up in a control group. all women were interviewed on entry into the study and after delivery of their infants. women assigned to group classes attended at least one session discussing myths, problems, and benefits of breast-feeding. women assigned to individual prenatal counseling spoke with a pediatrician or nurse practitioner, who discussed breast-feeding topics similar to those covered in the classes. women in the control group received no additional prenatal education. the three study groups had significantly different percentages of women who breast-fed (controls 22%, classes 46%, individual sessions 53%). higher percentages of women in the study groups carried out their prenatal plans to breast-feed (controls 50%, classes 86%, individual sessions 62%) or breast-fed despite prenatal plans to bottle-feed (controls 10%, classes 26%, individual sessions 48%). after multivariable analysis controlling for age, prenatal plans to breast-feed, prior breast-feeding experience, perceived support for breast-feeding, education, gravidity, and employment plans, women in intervention groups had a higher likelihood of breast-feeding than control subjects. these findings suggest that an increase in relatively simple, not-too-time-consuming educational efforts in institutions and offices serving black low-income women might yield significant narrowing of the gap in breast-feeding rates between white affluent women and black low-income women.

to evaluate access to health care for american children and adolescents, a telephone survey of a national random sample of households was conducted in which 2182 children 17 years or younger were studied. approximately 10% had no medical insurance; 10% had no regular source of care; and 18% identified emergency rooms, community clinics, or hospital outpatient departments as their usual site of medical care. children who were uninsured, poor, or nonwhite were less likely to have seen a physician in the past year (p less than .001), and uninsured children were less likely to have up-to-date immunizations. logistic regression analyses revealed that poor, uninsured, or nonwhite children less frequently had a regular source of care; more frequently used emergency rooms, community clinics, and hospital outpatient departments as their regular providers; and more frequently encountered financial barriers to health care. low-income or nonwhite children had much less access to care compared with children from more affluent or white families, independent of insurance status or health status.

the purpose of this paper is to examine whether children who care for themselves for longer periods of time are at increased risk of poor grades, truancy, anger, family conflict, stress, risk-taking, and peer influences (in addition to the increased risk of substance use previously reported). demographic characteristics of eighth-grade students who initiate self-care in junior high school are compared with those initiating self-care in elementary school. further, increased risks for those initiating self-care in elementary school are examined. over two thirds of the respondents (67.8%) cared for themselves after school without adult supervision at some time during the week; 23.5% for 1 to 4 hours per week, 15.7% for 5 to 10 hours per week, and 28.6% for 11 or more hours per week. of those in self-care, 48.5% initiated self-care during elementary school and 51.5% during junior high school. students who were in the highest category of self-care (greater than or equal to 11 hours per week) vs those in self-care zero hours per week were 1.5 to 2 times as likely to score high on risk-taking, anger, family conflict, and stress, to be more likely to see their friends as their major source of influence, and to attend more parties. the self-reports of academic grades did not differ. the grade of initiation of self-care (elementary vs junior high school) conferred additional risk for drinking alcohol (odds ratio = 1.4), risk-taking tendencies (odds ratio = 1.5), and attending parties (odds ratio = 1.6).

a cross-sectional survey was conducted among 60 families with a child with cystic fibrosis to assess their medical knowledge of the illness. a 63-item, multiple-choice test with acceptable psychometric properties was administered to 60 mothers, 54 fathers, 29 siblings (aged 10 to 23 years), and 18 patients (aged 9 to 22 years). parents and patients correctly answered approximately three quarters and siblings two thirds of all items. family members were most knowledgeable about general cystic fibrosis facts, physiotherapy, gastrointestinal symptomatology and treatment, and anatomy. they were less well-informed about respiratory symptomatology and treatment and nutrition. parental knowledge of genetics and reproductive risks was mediocre, and that of patients and siblings was poor. knowledge of terminology was uniformly low. social class was a significant predictor of parental knowledge. if left uncorrected the misconceptions, gaps, and errors in family members' knowledge of cystic fibrosis identified in this study could result in inadverent noncompliance in treatment of the patient.

the use of serum total cholesterol measurement was evaluated as a screening tool to predict elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in 2857 children and adolescents, aged 5 to 17 years, examined in 1981 and 1982. subjects were from the biracial community of bogalusa, louisiana. for selected serum total cholesterol values (150 to 210 mg/dl, 3.88 to 5.43 mmol/l), sensitivities were higher for blacks than whites and higher for females than males, whereas the positive predictive values were higher for whites than blacks and higher for males than females. with the age-, race-, and sex-specific 95th percentiles of serum total cholesterol levels as cutoff points, only 44% to 50% of subjects with elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (greater than or equal to 95th percentile) were detected, and approximately 50% of those identified had false-positive results. lowering the serum total cholesterol cutoff point increased the sensitivity, but decreased the specificity and positive predictive value. at the 75th percentiles of serum total cholesterol levels, sensitivities were 92% to 95% for females and 100% for males and specificities were 78% to 79%, but the false-positive results increased to 81% to 84%. the low cost and ease of obtaining serum total cholesterol measurements contribute to its appeal as a screening tool for hyperlipidemia. however, its poor test characteristics make serum total cholesterol measurement inefficient as a screening tool for detecting elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in children and adolescents.

the importance of haemophilus influenzae type b as the main cause of serious bacteremic infections in young children and the consequent need for preventive measures have been widely appreciated since the 1970s. the knowledge that serum antibodies to the polysaccharide capsule of h influenzae type b increase with age and correlate with resistance to this infection encouraged work toward a vaccine based on the h influenzae type b polysaccharide. such a vaccine was used in 1974 in a field trial in finland. two important lessons were learned. first, vaccine-induced antibodies to the polyribosylribitol-phosphate (prp) polysaccharide correlated with protection from disease caused by h influenzae type b, so that the serum anti-prp concentration predicting protection could be estimated as 1 microgram/ml. second, the vaccine was not effective in infancy; protection and serum antibody concentrations above 1 microgram/ml were not observed before 18 to 24 months of age. the poor immunogenicity of prp in infancy has been observed in a large number of studies and is shared by other bacterial polysaccharides. although the reason for this is not known, the most likely hypothesis associates poor immunizing ability in infancy with the "t-independent" nature of these polysaccharide antigens. such antigens would be unable to stimulate t lymphocytes; therefore, immunity to them would depend exclusively on b cells and antibodies produced by them. if infants, by and large, lack b cells that could be stimulated directly by a polysaccharide antigen, they cannot respond to the polysaccharide vaccine. this hypothesis immediately suggests possibilities for improvement of the vaccine.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

a comparison was made of 86 children from 49 homeless boston families headed by women and 134 children from 81 housed boston families headed by women. in both groups, the mothers were poor, currently single, and had been receiving welfare payments for long periods. data were collected from the mothers by personal interview; standardized tests were administered to mothers and children (denver developmental screening test, simmons behavior checklist, children's depression inventory, children's manifest anxiety scale, and child behavior checklist. the data indicate that many homeless children and poor children with homes have severe and pressing problems. among preschool children, a higher proportion of homeless children than poor children with homes had one or more developmental delays (p less than .05), although their scores on the simmons behavior checklist were similar. among school-aged children, the scores of the homeless children were worse than those of the children with homes on the children's depression inventory, children's manifest anxiety scale, and the child behavior checklist, but only the difference on the anxiety scale approached statistical significance (p = .06). both homeless children and poor children with homes generally had worse scores than most other comparison groups of children. unless action is taken to improve the lot of all these children, it is likely that many will continue to have significant problems that will seriously hamper their ability to function.

an analysis of the health status and health care utilization patterns of poor and nonpoor adolescents was conducted using a sample of 22,792 adolescents 10 to 18 years of age from the 1983 and 1984 national health interview surveys. the results indicate that adolescents from families with incomes below the poverty level were three times as likely to be reported in only fair or poor health status and were 47% more likely to suffer from disabling chronic illnesses than adolescents from families with incomes above the poverty level. use of inpatient hospital services was similar for adolescents from poor and nonpoor families when health status was controlled. however, adolescents from poor families were 35% more likely than those from nonpoor families to have waited 2 or more years between physician contacts. in addition, poor adolescents made 13% fewer physician contacts on an annual basis when compared with nonpoor adolescents. substantial differences in utilization rates were found when poor adolescents were disaggregated according to whether they were covered by medicaid. those with medicaid coverage used physician services at rates similar to nonpoor adolescents, whereas those without medicaid coverage lagged substantially behind. based on the conclusion that medicaid is effective in reducing barriers to needed services, strategies for expanding medicaid eligibility to additional low-income adolescents are discussed.

this analysis of a sample of 15,181 adolescents aged 10 to 18 years from the national health interview survey indicates that 86% of adolescents had some form of private or public health care coverage during 1984. nevertheless, one in every seven adolescents, or nearly 4.5 million nationwide, were without any form of health insurance coverage. adolescents without insurance coverage were concentrated in poor and near-poor households, families with little formal education, and were more likely to live in the south or west. minorities, especially hispanic adolescents, were less likely than white adolescents to have some form of health insurance coverage, but much of this difference was attributable to the smaller incomes of minorities. similarly, although adolescents living in single-parent households were less likely to be insured, the reduced likelihood of coverage appears to be primarily attributable to smaller family income in single-parent households. that family economics plays a central role in determining whether an adolescent had some form of coverage was confirmed by interview results concerning the major reasons for absence of coverage; 8 of 10 uninsured families cited economic reasons for absence of coverage. together, these results indicate the principal barriers to obtaining health insurance are economic in nature. public and private sector initiatives for reducing the size of the uninsured adolescent population are discussed.

individuals with cystic fibrosis have a 1% to 7% incidence of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. the occurrence of diabetic microangiopathy in patients with cystic fibrosis has been reported recently. from 1978 to 1987, 19 patients with cystic fibrosis and diabetes mellitus were followed up. four patients (21%) had evidence of diabetic microangiopathy. in one, peripheral neuropathy developed 5 years after the onset of diabetes mellitus, and the other 3 patients each had complications of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy which developed 10 years after the onset of diabetes mellitus. all were poorly compliant in their medical care. significant morbidity was seen in the 3 patients with multisystem involvement--blindness, glaucoma, hypertension, and renal failure. the combination of long-standing diabetes mellitus, poor glycemic control, plus pathophysiologic features associated with cystic fibrosis may have contributed to the development of microangiopathy. the use of steroids in 4 other patients and dextrose infusions (as part of hyperalimentation) in another 4 patients precipitated or exacerbated diabetes. the data indicate that diabetic microangiopathy can occur in the individual with cystic fibrosis. routine screening for diabetes and its complications in the population with cystic fibrosis, as well as optimal control of hyperglycemia, is warranted.

low birth weight, prematurity, and intrauterine growth retardation represent important health tasks for neonates. pregnancy outcome risk categories based on combinations of these variables and a measure of body proportions were developed and tested with respect to how well they predict poor growth during infancy. data were collected during a prospective community-based survey of births representative of the cebu region of the philippines. in the sample of 2139 births for which there were available birth weight and gestational age data, 20% of infants were classified as growth retarded and 12% were low birth weight. low birth weight, the more conservative category, was a better predictor of small infant size at 12 months of age than intrauterine growth retardation. rohrer's index, which captures information about patterns of intrauterine growth, improves the positive predictive value of categories based either on intrauterine growth retardation or low birth weight. infants who had an adequate rohrer's index, ie, were well proportioned at birth, were smaller at 12 months of age than infants who had a low rohrer's index, ie, had weight deficits relative to their lengths at birth. important questions about the value of the intrauterine growth retardation classification are raised by the results.

few data currently exist concerning the sleep problems of preadolescents. a parent report questionnaire concerning sleep habits and problems was developed. the questionnaires were completed by the parents of 1000 unscreened elementary school children attending the third, fourth, and fifth grades. the schools were randomly selected from an urban area. of the 1000 questionnaires, 972 were completed and could be used for statistical analysis. among the parents, 24% reported sleeping poorly and 12% regularly relied on sedatives to induce sleep. sleep difficulties lasting more than 6 months were present in 43% of the children. in 14% (132 of 972), sleep latency was longer than 30 minutes, and more than one complete arousal occurred during the night at least two nights per week. the following variables were seen among the poor sleepers: lower parental educational and professional status, parents who were more likely to be divorced or separated, and more noise or light in the rooms were they slept. they also presented a higher incidence of somnambulism, somniloquia, and night fears (nightmares and night terrors) than the children who slept well. boys who slept poorly were significantly more likely to have insomniac fathers (p less than .010). regular use of sedatives was described in 4% (5 of 132) of the children who slept poorly. among the "poor sleepers," 21% (33 of 132) had failed 1 or more years at school. school achievement difficulties were encountered significantly more often among the poor sleepers than among the children without sleep problems (p = .001). of the families with children suffering from sleep problems, 28% expressed a desire for counseling.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

there are no clear criteria for administration of blood to premature infants. in the past, indications for transfusion have included tachypnea, tachycardia, poor weight gain, apnea, bradycardia, pallor, lethargy, decreased activity, or poor feeding. some have suggested that erythropoietin levels may also be useful in determining the need for transfusion. data were studied from 11 premature infants with birth weights less than 1500 g collected throughout 469 hospital days. during that period the infants received a total of 37 blood transfusions. no overall relationship was found between hematocrit of 19% to 64% and heart rate, respiratory rate, or the occurrence of bradycardia; ie, these variables proved to be clinically unreliable as indicators of hematocrit. furthermore, no predictable effect of transfusion could be identified on heart rate, respiratory rate, or on the incidence of apnea or bradycardia. it was anticipated that frequent episodes of apnea or bradycardia might increase serum erythropoietin concentration. to the contrary, more frequent bradycardia was associated with the low erythropoietin levels because those infants tended to receive transfusions for "symptomatic" anemia. the data are consistent with the concept that "anemia of prematurity" is not predictably associated with symptoms classically attributed to anemia. possible reasons for this are that the premature infant has a different inherent response to anemia; that it is inappropriate to extrapolate symptoms of severe acute anemia to persons with mild or moderate chronic anemia; or, most likely, that other determinants of heart rate, respiratory rate, and apnea/bradycardia are of more importance than mild or moderate anemia.

adolescent pregnancy and adolescent drug use are important clinical and public health problems. yet, few studies have systematically investigated the patterns of substance use among pregnant and parenting adolescents. because adverse outcomes are not found uniformly for all adolescent mothers, use of illicit drugs may be a key factor in determining which mothers and their infants will have poor outcomes. in this study, the patterns of drug use are described and differences in the demographic and psychosocial profile among 253 pregnant adolescents are investigated. results obtained from interviews and urine assay for marijuana and cocaine indicate that lifetime use was 84% for alcohol, 62% for marijuana, and 23% for cocaine, whereas use in the past year was 40% for marijuana and 17% for cocaine. compared with nonusers, pregnant adolescent drug users were more likely to be north american black, have a history of elective abortion and venereal disease, report more negative life events and violence during pregnancy, and receive more support from the father of the baby who was more likely to use marijuana and cocaine (p less than .01). furthermore, according to logistic regression analysis results after controlling for age and ethnicity, adolescents who used illicit substances in the past year were three times more likely to have a male partner who used marijuana or cocaine and were two times more likely to have a history of venereal disease compared with nonusers. the findings suggest that drug use, whether as a mechanism or a marker, is associated with social and medical characteristics that are likely to contribute to negative outcomes among adolescent mothers and their infants.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

the purpose of the present study was to evaluate factors affecting the rate of macrosomia and related complications in a population of infants of insulin-dependent diabetic mothers. the following factors were hypothesized to be predisposing to macrosomia: increased maternal weight gain during gestation, increased number of births until infant no. 3, white race, increased maternal age, poor glycemic control from the 20th week of gestation, and increased insulin dose. advance white classification and increased duration of diabetes were predicted to be inversely related. in addition, macrosomia was hypothesized to predispose to selected adverse perinatal outcomes including premature labor, birth asphyxia, birth injury, hypoglycemia, polycythemia, and respiratory distress syndrome. from 1978 to 1986, 127 pregnancies were prospectively studied, 86 of the total number of women were entered prior to 10 weeks' gestation, and 41 were entered after 10 weeks' gestation. patients monitored blood glucose at least twice daily with glycemic control achieved by "split-dosage" regimens of insulin. glycohemoglobin was measured monthly. pregnancy dating was based on the date of the last menstrual period and the ballard score of the infant at birth. macrosomia was defined as a birth weight greater than the 90th percentile of the intrauterine growth curves of lubchenco. of the babies born to mothers with insulin-dependent diabetes, 43% were large for gestational age and 57% were appropriate for gestational age.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

the records of all patients with biliary atresia seen at the childrens hospital of los angeles during a 14-year period were reviewed. of the 41 patients who could be evaluated, 32 were treated with trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis, five were given other agents, and four received no prophylaxis after surgery. at least one episode of cholangitis occurred in nine patients. with one exception, all patients destined to have cholangitis did so within 9 months of surgery. of the nine patients, five were receiving prophylaxis at the time the disease developed, but two were no longer receiving any prophylaxis. the other two patients in whom cholangitis developed never received antibiotic prophylaxis. in the 24 patients who had a kasai type of portoenterostomy, cholangitis developed in three of the five (60%) with a roux-en-y limb length less than 40 cm and in two of the 19 (10.5%) with limb lengths greater than 40 cm (p less than .02). when performed earlier than 61 days after birth, surgery resulted in adequate bile flow in 64.7% (11/17) of patients who could be evaluated as compared with 31.8% (7/22) for surgery at 61 days or later (p less than .05). of the patients with adequate biliary drainage 11 had no apparent liver disease, but only two of the patients with poor drainage were free of clinical liver disease. the conclusion from this series is that a combination of timely surgery, intestinal conduit at least 40 cm in length, and subsequent long-term antibiotic prophylaxis favors the best bile flow and reduces the occurrence of cholangitis, resulting in the best outcome.

in a prospective, randomized study of 18 infants treated with bovine surfactant (surfactant ta, tokyo tanabe co, tokyo) for severe respiratory distress syndrome, a lasting response was found in 12 infants (66%), a transient response was found in two (11%), and no response was found in four (22%) when arterial to alveolar po2 ratios were used to define responses during the first 48 hours after treatment. in contrast, three of 23 control infants (13%) had a transient or lasting "response" to sham treatment (pediatrics 1987;79:31-37). to determine whether maldistribution of surfactant could explain lack of response or a transient response, surfactant ta was mixed with technetium-99m sulfur colloid (approximately 300 mu ci per infant), and eight infants with severe respiratory distress syndrome were treated six to 58 hours after birth. scintigraphy of the lungs was performed three to 15 hours after treatment. although a lasting response was observed in three infants, a transient one in three, and no response in two, no gross maldistribution of the radioactive label was found. either lung received from 37% to 62% of the total radioactivity. during the past 3 years, in all infants with severe respiratory distress syndrome who were treated with surfactant (n = 29), poor or transient responses were associated with early patent ductus arteriosus and air leaks (pulmonary interstitial emphysema and pneumothoraces). pathophysiologic conditions associated with respiratory distress syndrome are more likely to explain suboptimal responses after surfactant treatment than gross maldistribution of surfactant in the lungs.

in anecdotal reports, problems have been cited in the health care of physicians' children, but no systematic study of this issue has been attempted. pediatricians in a community of high physician density were interviewed to determine whether and how the health care of physicians' children differs from that of children of equivalent socioeconomic status. of the community's 33 pediatricians, 94% responded to items in a 45-minute structured interview, for which test-retest reliability was demonstrated. systematic differences in the care of physicians' children included delayed help seeking and increased self-referral to specialists by parents, and poor documentation of psychosocial history, less detailed instruction giving, and a reluctance to discuss problem behavior by pediatricians. reasons cited by pediatricians for these problems included inappropriate assumptions concerning the medical knowledge of the physician's family, confusion between the roles of healer and help seeker, and embarrassment about discussing personal issues with colleagues. pediatricians and physician parents need to become aware of and communicate about the potential for problems in the health care of physicians' children.

the opaque-2 gene was shown years ago to increase the nitrogen, lysine, and tryptophan contents of maize and to markedly increase its nutritional value for small children. concerns about decreased yield, resistance, and acceptability discouraged further development of the gene. quality protein maize, while retaining the opaque-2 characteristics, has overcome those constraints. six recovering malnourished infants received diets in which all of the 6.4% protein energy was supplied by casein, quality protein maize, or common maize. the quality protein maize supplied 60% and common maize 75% of total energy. vegetable oil was added to increase fat contents to 10% of total energy in all diets. energy digestibility was less (87% and 84%) from quality protein maize and common maize than from casein diets (94%); most of the difference was due to carbohydrate digestibility. apparent n absorptions from quality protein maize (70 +/- 5%) and common maize (69% +/- 7%) were much lower (p less than .01) than from casein (82% +/- 4%). apparent retention of n from quality protein maize (34 +/- 4%) was less (p less than .01) than from casein (41% +/- 9%) but greater (p less than .01) than from common maize (22% +/- 10%). breath hydrogen excretions were usually greater during quality protein maize consumption than during casein diets but not nearly as much as those during common maize diets. the nutritional advantages of quality protein maize v common maize are of a magnitude that must be exploited for the advantage of children in maize-consuming poor countries.

the purpose of this project was to evaluate the use of the early language milestone scale (elm) in screening language skills in young children. in this study, 657 children from birth to 36 months of age were evaluated with the elm. the overall failure rate was 8%. children who failed the elm screening were evaluated with the sequenced inventory of communication development (sicd) that was used as the "gold standard" for diagnosing language disorders. in the 12-month age and younger group, there was poor agreement between the elm scale and the sicd. for infants 13 to 24 months of age, there was moderately good agreement between the sicd and a second elm that was administered 1 to 2 weeks after the initial screening. in the 25- to 36-month age group, there was excellent agreement between the sicd and a rescreen elm. the agreement between the two instruments indicated that the rescreen elm correctly classified 79% of the 13- to 24-month-old infants and 89% of the 25- to 36-month-old toddlers.

extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is an important technology in the treatment of high-risk infants whose long-term outcome is being followed prospectively at our institution. the extracorporeal membrane oxygenation procedure allows temporary cardiopulmonary support for critically ill full-term neonates who are refractory to maximum ventilatory and medical management as a consequence of severe persistent pulmonary hypertension. the technique necessitates both the permanent ligation of the right common carotid artery and jugular vein and systemic heparinization. the survivors constitute a unique group of high-risk infants, from the standpoint of the hypoxic-ischemic insults preceding extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and the risks associated with the procedure. our results indicate that most of our survivors are developing normally at 1 year. major morbidity, in terms of either significant developmental delay (bayley mental and motor indices less than 70) or significant neuromotor abnormality, occurred in only 10% of these infants. poor outcome was associated with major intracranial hemorrhage and chronic lung disease. ligation of the right carotid artery and jugular vein was not associated with a consistent lateralizing lesion. long-term follow-up through school age is essential.

growth characteristics of 57 children with feeding gastrostomies attending the cerebral palsy clinic at a regional medical facility were evaluated. all children had severe neuromotor and orofacial involvement and mental retardation. more than 90% of the patients were less than fifth percentile for height and weight, and 80% were underweight for height before gastrostomy tube placement. following gastrostomy, 33% remained underweight for height and 21% became overweight for height. the majority of children remained at less than the fifth percentile for height and weight. improvement in linear growth was much less common than improvement in weight. children with gastrostomies placed in the first year of life were most likely to exceed the fifth percentile for height and weight. the mechanisms of growth retardation in children severely affected by cerebral palsy are not known, but poor nutrition is thought to be the major contributor. gastrostomy feeding in children severely affected by cerebral palsy can improve nutritional status but does not eliminate growth retardation. the importance of growth and adequate nutrition in reducing morbidity in children with severe neuromotor involvement remains to be established.

eleven unselected 47,xxx girls, now 15 to 22 years of age, have been observed from birth in a prospective study of children with sex chromosome anomalies. a description of their growth and development is presented. the 47,xxx infants were not generally distinguishable from chromosomally normal children in the first year of life, even though there was a slight delay in neuromotor development. by 2 years of age, developmental delays in speech and language often became evident, and speech therapy was often necessitated in the preschool years. early school problems included speech and language deficiencies, lack of coordination, poor academic performance, and immature behavior; these persisted throughout the school years. by high school age, a 47,xxx girl was generally tall and often subject to somatic complaints. sexual development was generally normal. seven of the 11 propositae had a diagnosed psychiatric disorder or disturbance at some time during adolescence. variability within this syndrome is great; one proposita is in college and another is mentally retarded. the frequency of the diagnosis of the 47,xxx karyotype by genetic amniocentesis is estimated to be 1/1000, the same incidence as in the newborn population. expectant parents must be counseled as to the significance of this karyotype and prognostic information must be given. suggested guidelines are included.

use of ambulatory care services by children from low-income families has increased substantially since the early 1960s. however, in few studies have attempts been made to disaggregate physician visits according to type (eg, preventive upsilon diagnosis and treatment). in this study, receipt of preventive care (including physical, vision, and dental examinations), based on a sample of 16,838 children aged 5 to 16 years from the 1982 national health interview survey, was examined. the results indicate that children in families with incomes below the poverty level, especially those without medicaid insurance, are much less likely to receive routine preventive care on a timely basis. poor school-aged children with medicaid are much more likely to receive timely preventive care than their counterparts without medicaid coverage. the effectiveness of preventive care for children is discussed and suggestions for improving access to routine preventive care are presented.

comparison was made of the mental function and physical growth of 21 children in whom liver disease occurred in the first year of life with 15 patients with late (17 months of age to 12 years of age) manifestation of liver disease. ages (mean +/- sd) at testing for the two groups was 8 +/- 3 years for the early group and 11 +/- 5 years for the late group. wechsler verbal, performance, and full-scale iq scores were lower for the early group (range of mean scores: early, 85 to 86 v late, 96 to 103). growth measures were significantly different in the two groups. means +/- sd (percentage of standard) were: length for early group, 92 +/- 9; for late, 99 +/- 7; and head circumference for early, 98 +/- 4; for late, 101 +/- 2. the groups were similar in severity of liver disease and acute nutritional status, however. patients with intellectual impairment had a longer duration of illness, poor nutritional status, and vitamin e deficiency; 82% of impaired patients were in the early group. the data suggest that liver disease during early life has pernicious effects on intellectual function and linear growth. careful monitoring of nutritional status of children with early-onset liver disease and aggressive nutritional support beginning at the time of diagnosis may help reduce delays in growth and mental development.

extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) has dramatically increased the survival rate of hypoxemic neonates who are unresponsive to maximum conventional medical therapy. because ecmo involves multiple risks, including ligation of the right common carotid artery and right internal jugular vein, ecmo candidates should be neurologically intact neonates with a high probability of death despite maximum conventional ventilatory support. currently, criteria based on the calculated alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (a-ado2) have replaced the neonatal pulmonary insufficiency index for predicting mortality and, thus, ecmo eligibility. a retrospective review of death prediction for the 26 months prior to the initiation of an ecmo program revealed a sensitivity of 67% and a specificity of 96% using the criterion of a pao2 of less than 50 mm hg for four hours. an equivalent a-ado2 criterion of greater than or equal to 630 for four hours produced a sensitivity of 61% and a specificity of 96%. prediction of mortality in neonates with sepsis was poor regardless of the criteria used. excluding the deaths due to sepsis increased the sensitivity to 86% and 79% using criteria based on pao2 and a-ado2, respectively. it is concluded that the use of criteria based on pao2 is equivalent to criteria based on a-ado2 for predicting mortality. criteria based on pao2 may, however, decrease both the false-negative rate (patients with an elevated pco2) and the false-positive rate (patients with intentionally induced hypocarbia secondary to hyperventilation alkalosis).

studies of the health status of homeless people have primarily focused on alcoholic men and have reported numerous excess health risks. to determine the health status of children in homeless families, we performed a population-based, cross-sectional survey of a probability sample of 82 homeless families having a total of 158 children 17 days to 17 years of age living in emergency shelters in king county, washington. heights and weights were also measured. seventy-five percent of the children belonged to racial minorities, and 54% were less than 6 years old. nearly half the children (49%) had a wide variety of reported acute and chronic health problems. less than 10% of the children measured were short for their age or underweight, whereas 35% were greater than the 95th percentile for weight-for-height. when compared with the us general pediatric population, the proportion of homeless children reported to be in "fair" or "poor" health was four times higher (13% v 3.2%). thirty-five percent of the children had no health insurance, and 59% of the children had no regular health care provider. the homeless children used emergency rooms at a rate that was two to three times higher than the us general pediatric population (480/1,000 homeless children for 6-month period v 254/1,000 us children for 12-month period), twice as likely to lack measles immunization (21% v 9.0%), and twice as likely to never have had a tuberculosis skin test (48% v 27%). the data suggest that children in homeless families have poorer reported health status and are not obtaining preventive medical care.

in this study, the potential for short courses of glucocorticoids to prevent or reduce the severity of asthma induced by viral respiratory infections in preschool children was investigated. two groups of children with a mean age of 36.4 +/- 3.9 months and 40.4 +/- 4.9 months were monitored during a 2-year period. group 1, considered as the control group, received theophylline preparations and orciprenaline either on a continuous basis or during attacks. during severe attacks, albuterol was administered by nebulization, with corticosteroids occasionally added for seven to 14 days in cases of poor response to albuterol. group 2 received the same treatment during the first year. during the second year, however, a short-term course of prednisone (1 mg/kg) was given as soon as the first symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection appeared, prior to any signs of wheezing. results indicate that, whereas morbidity remained constant in the control group during the 2-year observation period, a significant decrease in the number of wheezing days (65%), attacks (56%), visits to the emergency room (61%), and hospitalizations (90%) occurred in group 2. it was concluded that preschool children who suffer from repeated asthma attacks related to upper respiratory tract infections may benefit greatly from the preventive administration of corticosteroids.

the photophysical properties of sn-protoporphyrin and two of its synthetic analogues, sn-mesoporphyrin and sn-diiododeuteroporphyrin, were examined. all three compounds are potent competitive inhibitors of heme oxygenase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of heme to bilirubin, and can suppress completely or diminish significantly experimentally induced or naturally occurring forms of jaundice in animals or man. the results of these studies show that all three compounds have long-lived triplet states which are quenched by molecular oxygen both in solution and when incorporated in liposomes. however, the addition of quenching groups such as iodine to the porphyrin macrocycle results in a marked (approximately 60%) decrease in the triplet yield and a threefold decrease in the triplet lifetime. the triplet yield was shown to be independent of the excitation wavelength, and as a result, the metalloporphyrins were extremely poor photosensitizers when excited in the spectral region commonly used in phototherapy. in the presence of serum albumin, the triplet state of sn-protoporphyrin was not quenched by oxygen. these results indicate that sn-porphyrins can be custom designed with considerably reduced photosensitizing properties for potential clinical use as inhibitors of bilirubin production.

if they lived in households without piped water or a toilet, malaysian infants who did not breast-feed were five times more likely to die after 1 week of age than those who breast-fed, when other significant factors affecting infant mortality were taken into account. this is double the relative risk associated with not breast-feeding for infants born into households with toilets, whether or not they had piped water. analogously, improvements in toilet sanitation appear to have reduced mortality twice as much among infants who did not breast-feed as among those who did. these findings, from a retrospective survey of infants born to a probability sample of 1,262 women in peninsular malaysia, confirm the pernicious synergistic effect of poor sanitation and nonbreastfeeding that was postulated previously on theoretical grounds. promoting and maintaining high initiation of breast-feeding is thus particularly important where poor sanitation is prevalent. even more affluent areas should not be neglected, however, because socioeconomic improvement, including improved environmental sanitation, is often accompanied by decreased breast-feeding. although the risk to each nonbreast-fed infant was less in those areas, infants there were less likely to breast-feed in malaysia, and hence they made up a significant proportion of lives that could be saved by breast-feeding.

a severe infantile form of nemaline myopathy has a high mortality rate when untreated because of subsequent malnutrition and respiratory failure. three infants with this condition demonstrated persistent vomiting, poor weight gain, and recurrent pneumonias. esophageal manometry demonstrated decreased lower esophageal sphincter pressures and low amplitude peristalsis; 24-hour esophageal ph monitoring revealed significant gastroesophageal reflux. medical therapy was ineffective in relieving symptoms. after antireflux surgery, vomiting and respiratory symptoms ceased, and there was no longer significant gastroesophageal reflux during ph monitoring. our experience indicates that in some infants with nemaline myopathy a severe form of gastroesophageal reflux develops that is not responsive to medical therapy. early surgical intervention may decrease life-threatening complications associated with gastroesophageal reflux in these infants.

outcome, resource utilization, and health care characteristics of patients staying in a multidisciplinary pediatric intensive care unit (picu) for more than 13 days (long-stay patients) were analyzed. of 647 children admitted consecutively, 46 were long-stay patients. compared with short-stay patients, long-stay patients were significantly younger and sicker and had a higher incidence of chronic disease. most important, long-stay patients had significantly higher picu mortality rates (17.4% v 7.3%, p less than .05) and hospital mortality rates (23.9% v 8.7%, p less than .01) than short-stay picu patients. although only 7.1% of the patient sample, long-stay patients consumed approximately 50% of all picu resources. one-year follow-up on those long-stay patients surviving their hospitalization revealed that 58% had died or were severely disabled. long-stay patients had relatively poor prognoses and consumed health care resources in excess of their numeric proportions.

in spite of inadequate laboratory demonstrations of sleep problems in children with attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, the belief persists that such problems exist. sleep restlessness is, in fact, one of the criteria in the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, ed 3, definition of attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, and sleep problems are listed on two major checklists often used for describing the symptoms of this disorder. in a series of three studies, sleep problems were investigated in preschool-aged children with attention deficit disorder relative to control children without the disorder. results of the first two studies demonstrated clearly that parents of hyperactive children considered their children to have many more sleep problems than did parents of the control children. parental daily documentation, which is less likely to be affected by reporting bias, was used in the third study. although the results of the third study supported the finding of increased frequency of night wakings in these children, there was no difference in total sleep time or sleep onset latency between the two groups. two other significant group differences (enuresis and night sweats) were primarily due to subgroups of children with attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity. the greater number of sleep wakings, which disrupt parents' sleep, may be responsible for the clinical reports that these children are poor sleepers.

parent-child associations of height, weight, subscapular skinfold thickness, blood pressure, and serum lipids and lipoproteins were observed in a cohort of 440 infants and their parents in bogalusa, la. the infants were examined according to a standardized protocol six times from birth to 7 years of age, and the parents were examined when the child was 2 years old. regression analyses were performed with the value of the cardiovascular risk factor variable for the child as the dependent variable and race, sex of child, and either mother's value, father's value, or both mother's and father's values as the independent variables. the most significant relationship between parents and their children was for height (p less than .005 at all ages of the child) and weight (p less than .05 from age 1 year for father's regression coefficient and at all ages for mother's regression coefficient). regression coefficients for parental serum lipids and lipoproteins tended to increase with the child's age. child-father regression coefficients and child-mother regression coefficients were generally significant (p less than .05) after age 2 years for total cholesterol. less association was noted for triglycerides and lipoproteins. parental diastolic bp was a poor predictor of children's values; the regression coefficients for systolic bp were higher and more significant. the longitudinal nature of this cohort study allows for examination of the changing patterns of familial association with aging and may provide insight as to the best age for examining children for cardiovascular risk factors to determine their relative risk for heart disease.

two full-term neonates, one with convulsions and intermittent generalized hypotonia and one with poor sucking, temperature instability, and lethargy, are reported. ct scan findings suggested cerebral arterial infarction. arteriography revealed occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, unilaterally in the first and bilaterally in the second patient. the evolution of the infarct could be followed on serial ct scans. no predisposing factors during pregnancy or delivery were found, and serious neurologic deficits developed in both children. these cases demonstrate that, even in full-term neonates with discrete or moderate neurologic symptoms and born after normal pregnancy and delivery, the possibility of vasoocclusive brain infarction should be considered. the diagnosis is suggested by imaging techniques, of which ct scanning seems to have the greatest value at present. this technique also permits the follow-up of the lesions. the prognosis for neurologic development appears to be variable: minor neurologic deficits as well as unexplained spastic hemiplegia in older children may be the consequence of inapparent cerebral arterial infarction in the neonatal period.

the mortality rates of infants born in kentucky during 1982 and 1983 were analyzed to determine whether there were differences between poor and nonpoor infants. we used computer matching with the social insurance food stamp files and with the aid for families with dependent children files to define poor and nonpoor kentucky resident families. the crude death rate for poor infants was 13.7/1,000 births, and the nonpoor death rate was 10.8/1,000 births. after adjusting for several important variables, we found that the poor infant was at a significantly greater risk for death than the nonpoor infant but only during the postneonatal period (relative risk 2.04, p = .0003). some differences by sex and race were noted. sudden infant death syndrome and infections were largely responsible for the poor infants' higher postneonatal mortality risk.

parental misconceptions and health beliefs concerning what constitutes a normal diet for infants is reported as a cause for failure to thrive. there were seven patients (four boys, three girls), 7 to 22 months of age, who were evaluated for poor weight gain and linear growth. they were only consuming 60% to 94% of the recommended caloric intake for age and sex. the children's caloric intake had been restricted by their parents. they were concerned that the children would become obese, develop atherosclerosis, become junk food dependent, and/or develop eating habits that the parents believed were unhealthy. the parents instituted diets consistent with health beliefs currently in vogue and recommended by the medical community for adults who are at risk for cardiovascular disease. these diets caused the infants to experience inadequate weight gain and have a decreased linear growth rate. with nutritional counseling, all food restrictions were removed, the caloric intake was increased to 94% to 147% of the recommended intake for age. the weight gain rate increased significantly (p less than .05) from 0.1 +/- 0.1 kg/mo to 0.4 +/- 0.3 kg/mo, and the linear growth rate increased significantly (p less than .05) from 0.4 +/- 0.4 cm/mo to 1.0 +/- 0.6 cm/mo within 3 months of therapy. exaggerated concerns about excessive food intake in childhood and/or concern about the sequelae of eating an improper diet has resulted in this entity of failure to thrive due to parental health beliefs.

a varicella-like illness occurred in five of 52 children with acute lymphocytic leukemia following the administration of live varicella vaccine. only one of the children required treatment with acyclovir. virus isolated from two of the children was "vaccine-like" but differed slightly from the original vaccine strain when tested by restriction enzyme analysis. there did not appear to be a reversion to virulence because two of the household contacts who seroconverted had mild or subclinical infections. vaccinees in whom this reaction developed tended to have a poor cellular immune response to varicella-zoster virus.

since national surveillance for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids) began in 1981, the centers for disease control (cdc) has received reports of more than 20,000 cases of aids in the united states. as of december 31, 1985, 307 of these cases had been diagnosed in children younger than 13 years of age. the number of cases is increasing rapidly. the number of cases reported in 1985 more than doubled those reported in 1984. the major risk factors in children for acquiring infection with the causative agent, human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), were having a mother known to be infected and/or at increased risk for infection and receiving a transfusion of blood or blood products. of the 307 children with aids, 73% were reported from one of four states: new york, new jersey, florida, and california. most aids cases in children occur in black or hispanic infants and toddlers. the estimated incubation period for aids in children has increased each surveillance year, with the longest incubation exceeding 7 years. the prognosis for children with aids is poor and infants less than 1 year of age have the shortest survival time following diagnosis. continued national surveillance for aids is mandatory for establishing effective prevention programs to control the spread of the disease. the cdc encourages all health care personnel to report cases of aids to their public health departments.

since the 1970s, breast-feeding as the preferred method of infant feeding has increased in overall popularity. however, certain populations, particularly poor, young, black, and less-educated women, have been slow to adopt this method. this prospective study was undertaken to identify factors relating to the choice of infant-feeding method among inner-city adolescents. two hundred fifty-four pregnant adolescents completed a questionnaire supplying information regarding attitudes toward and knowledge about breast-feeding, social support, personal experience, and other variables hypothesized to correlate with their choice of infant-feeding method. of the total sample, 17% said they were "probably" or "definitely" going to breast-feed their babies. analyses revealed adolescents most likely to intend to breast-feed were those who perceived more benefits to breast-feeding, who desired more knowledge about it, who were themselves breast-fed, who reported supportive social environments, and who perceived relatively fewer barriers to breast-feeding their infants. specific interventions based upon these findings are proposed. we conclude that adolescent mothers are interested in breast-feeding their babies and that interventions are feasible to increase breast-feeding within this population.

the epidemiology of recurrent stomachache and headache was studied in a community sample of 308 preschool children, most of whom were white. when the children were 3 years old, interviews with their mothers indicated that 3% had recurrent headaches and 9% had recurrent stomachaches. children with recurrent stomachaches were more likely than those without recurrent stomachaches to have mothers who were emotionally depressed (p less than .01), had marital problems (p less than .05), and perceived their own health as poor (p less than .05). when maternal poor health was controlled, depression was still associated with their children having stomachaches (p less than .05). prospectively collected data demonstrate that children with recurrent stomachaches did not have bowel difficulties when they were infants. other psychosocial stresses and demographic factors were not associated with stomachaches. the only variable associated with recurrent headache was maternal depression. children with recurrent headaches or stomachaches were more likely to have behavior problems, as measured by the behavior screening questionnaire, than were children without these symptoms. the analysis presents new data on these common symptoms of childhood.

in this prospective, longitudinal study, the relative impact of intracranial hemorrhage and prolonged mechanical ventilation on developmental progress during the first 18 months of life of infants weighing 1,200 g or less at birth was examined. a total of 159 surviving infants were divided into two groups: infants with and those without intracranial hemorrhage. these groups were then subdivided into groups of infants receiving prolonged mechanical ventilation (greater than 21 days) and those mechanically ventilated for 21 days or less, thus creating four subgroups. group 1 (intracranial hemorrhage and prolonged mechanical ventilation) and group 3 (intracranial hemorrhage and no prolonged mechanical ventilation) showed no statistically significant differences for severity of intracranial hemorrhage, persistence of ventriculomegaly, or presence of periventricular leukomalacia. a repeated-measures analysis of variance demonstrated a main effect for prolonged mechanical ventilation on outcome as measured by the bayley mental development index and bayley psychomotor development index at 4, 8, 12, and 18 months of age (corrected for prematurity). forward stepwise regression revealed prolonged mechanical ventilation to the best predictor of bayley indexes at all ages except 4 months of age, for which the psychomotor development index was best predicted by length of hospitalization. no main effect for intracranial hemorrhage was demonstrated, but the motor performance of infants with intracranial hemorrhage declined significantly with age. by contrast prolonged mechanical ventilation was associated with uniformly poor performance at every age and serves as a powerful marker for poor developmental progress during the first 18 months of life in infants weighing 1,200 g or less at birth.

pneumatic otoscopy was performed on 81 healthy full-term babies during the first 72 hours of life and at routine well-baby follow-up visits. only 14 of 115 (12%) of the eardrums visualized during the first three days of life moved briskly to insufflation as compared with 29 of 65 (44%) and 50 of 71 (71%) by 3 weeks and 10 weeks of age, respectively. a pink color was noted in 38 of 115 (33%) and redness in five of 115 (4%) of the eardrums examined during the first 72 hours of life, whereas 64 of 71 (90%) of the tympanic membranes appeared gray by age 10 weeks. tympanic membrane dullness, decreased light reflex, and diminished translucence occurred in greater than 90% of the infants during the first three days of life and declined to 26% or less by 4 months of age. the data suggest that limited mobility, changes in color, poor luster, and relative opacity of the tympanic membrane occur in healthy neonates and may reflect physiologic changes unique to the newborn period.

a randomized study was initiated in neonates with neutropenia (absolute peripheral neutrophil count less than 1,500/microl) and suspected bacterial infection. twenty infants with proven infection were enrolled, nine of whom had depletion of bone marrow stores of maturing neutrophils (less than or equal to 7% metamyelocyte, band and mature forms per 100 nucleated cells). these nine were randomized to receive 15 ml/kg of either buffy coat transfusions (group 2) or plasma and blood products (group 3). the remaining 11 (group 1) were observed. peripheral neutrophil counts were monitored to determine the neutrophil response to transfusions. there were ten of 11 patients in group 1, two of four in group 2, and two of five in group 3 who lived at least seven days. no complications of transfusion were noted. no difference in the rate of peripheral neutrophil increase was found among the three groups. the study was stopped when it became clear that sufficient numbers of patients could not be entered into the study, in a reasonable period of time, to prove or disprove a clinically significant improvement in outcome. although in vitro testing of the buffy coat preparations showed normal function in three of four cases, the clinical quality of the buffy coats may have been inadequate because of poor availability of whole fresh blood less than 24 hours old. the role of neutrophil transfusions in these patients remains unclear.

the impact of alcohol and marijuana abuse on the physical health and nutritional status of adolescents has not been well documented. the health consequences of alcoholism and chemical abuse in adults may not relate to the pediatric population. forty-nine adolescent boys (mean age 15.8 years) with varying degrees of alcohol and marijuana use by self-report were evaluated as to their general health, pubertal development and nutritional status using health and dietary history, physical examination, anthropometrics, and biochemical assays of liver function and tissue nutrients. thirteen (27%) were alcohol and marijuana abusers, 20 (41%) marijuana abusers, and 16 (32%) nonusers. there were significant differences between alcohol and marijuana abusers and marijuana abusers compared to nonusers with respect to endorsing symptoms of nutritional deficiency (muscle weakness, bleeding gums, tiredness, etc) (p less than .001). there were no significant differences between subgroups in other nutritional measures except plasma zinc concentration which was low in marijuana abusers (mean 85 micrograms/dl). all adolescents reported consuming adequate nutrients, although alcohol and marijuana abusers reported eating more snack foods and less fruit, vegetables, and milk than other groups. there were no significant differences in hematologic status (complete blood cell count, transferrin, folate), liver function (gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase), or anthropometric and sexual maturational indices of growth. there were no chronic signs of chemical abuse by physical examinations. it appears that health and nutritional disability from chemical abuse in adolescents relates more to poor dietary habits and symptomatic deterioration in general health than to specific effects on growth or nutritional status. studies with larger numbers of subjects need to document these findings.

maternal depression is common in clinical experience but has not been fully addressed in the pediatric literature. depression can refer to either depressive symptoms or a diagnosable depression. depression among mothers occurs frequently, is persistent, and is related to other factors such as low social class and marital disharmony. studies demonstrate an association between a mother's depression and adverse outcomes for her child including low birth weight, behavior problems, somatic complaints, poor growth, accidents, and affective illness. affect and child-rearing characteristics of depressed mothers seem to be important factors in mediating these poor outcomes. pediatricians have a special role in helping depressed mothers and their children.

using data from the 1981 child health supplement to the national health interview survey, we examined differences in access to ambulatory services for children of different family incomes. the results indicate that much progress has been made in equalizing access since the war on poverty was initiated in the mid-1960s. poor children with superior health status now generally see physicians at the same rates as children in similar health but from higher income families. however, children with substantial health problems from low-income families continue to lag behind their higher income counterparts in similar health. medicaid was shown to substantially improve access to ambulatory services for economically disadvantaged children in poor health, but less than half of these children are covered by medicaid. recent changes in federal and state policies concerning medicaid are discussed as well as policy options for addressing the needs of children afflicted by both poverty and ill health.

two groups of prepubertal children with severe obstructive sleep apnea syndrome received continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) treatment using a nasal mask. the five children in group a had nasal cpap only in a hospital setting; the five children in group b received the treatment at home as well. four of these five children, who have now been followed for as long as 10 months, have adapted well to the treatment at home. the problems encountered with nasal cpap as a home treatment, such as poor cooperation from parents, allergic rashes, eye irritation resulting from air leaks, are discussed. despite the problems, nasal cpap is a valid alternative to tracheostomy in children as young as 3 years of age.

this report describes the neurologic manifestations of 36 children with human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection. in this cohort, in 16 of 21 children with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), three of 12 children with aids-related complex, and one of three asymptomatic seropositive children, a progressive encephalopathy developed. neurologic signs were often detected early but tended to worsen coincident with progression of the immunodeficiency. the presence of progressive encephalopathy correlated with the absence of serum neutralizing antibodies to hiv and with a poor, usually fatal, outcome. the incubation period from initial hiv infection in the perinatal period to the onset of progressive encephalopathy varied from 2 months to 5 years. intrablood-brain barrier synthesis of hiv-specific antibodies was demonstrated in eight of 14 children with aids and aids-related complex, indicating active brain infection with hiv. in three cases this was unassociated with progressive neurologic signs. unique neuropathologic findings in children who died with hiv infection further suggest that the progressive encephalopathy is the result of primary and persistent infection of the brain with this retrovirus. these findings broaden the spectrum of hiv infection in children and have important implications for the development of antiviral therapy.

rheumatoid factor is commonly used by clinicians to assess children with possible juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. to assess its usefulness, we reviewed the case histories of patients in whom latex agglutinating rheumatoid factor was determined during 1981 to 1982 at our institution. a total of 437 charts were available for review. there were 11 patients with positive tests for rheumatoid factor, of whom five had juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, all polyarticular. a total of 426 children had negative results, of whom 100 had juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. this yields a sensitivity of 4.8% and a specificity of 98%. we then estimated the prevalence of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in three clinical settings: a primary practitioner's office, a tertiary children's hospital walk-in clinic, and a pediatric rheumatology center. the predictive values and marginal benefits for rheumatoid factor were then calculated in those settings using bayes' theorem. in the two general outpatient settings, the primary practitioner's office and tertiary walk-in clinic, the positive predictive values were 0.7% and 0.5%, respectively; marginal benefits were 0.4% and 0.3%, respectively. rheumatoid factor testing appeared to be of some benefit in the pediatric rheumatology center with a positive predictive value of 72.5% and marginal benefit of 22.5%. in no case was rheumatoid factor testing helpful in establishing a diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or in ruling it out. testing for rheumatoid factor is a poor screening procedure for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in the general situations in which it is more likely to be requested and of supportive diagnostic value only in the highly restricted population of older children with polyarticular arthritis.

the role of hypercalciuria and hyperphosphaturia in the growth retardation of children with diabetes mellitus was investigated in 157 children with diabetes whose mean height was less than that of 37 nondiabetic siblings of similar age (p less than .025). hyperglycemia, hypercalciuria, and hyperphosphaturia were assessed coincident with the height measurement of each child in a cross-sectional survey. the distribution of height percentiles of the children with diabetes was skewed to the left with 61% at or below the 50th percentile. eleven percent of the insulin-dependent children with diabetes mellitus were shorter than would be anticipated by a normal distribution of the 157 children. the duration of diabetes (hyperglycemia) had the greatest influence upon the children's height. children with diabetes were shorter than the nondiabetic subjects by the fourth year of hyperglycemia, and this difference in height became statistically significant after 7 years or more of diabetes. the degree of hypercalciuria and hyperphosphaturia was more closely associated with reduced height in children with diabetes than was the degree of hyperglycemia, although the renal wastage of calcium and phosphorus seemed to be the result of glucosuria. because hypercalciuria and hyperphosphaturia impair growth in nondiabetic children, they may also play an important role in the poor growth of children with diabetes mellitus.

delayed initiation of proper therapy for infants with primary infantile glaucoma results in an unnecessarily poor outcome. in an effort to understand why some infants and children had more advanced disease than others, researchers reviewed the records of 24 consecutive infants and children with this problem. the presenting signs and symptoms were studied in particular. as noted by the parents, only 32% had the full classic symptom complex of epiphora and photophobia/blepharospasm. twenty-one percent of infants and children presented with parents having noted signs of infantile glaucoma without ever noting symptoms. more than 90% of infants and children had signs of glaucoma at their initial presentation to a physician. signs of glaucoma are apparently more difficult to appreciate in bilateral cases. in each of the three cases in which physicians repeatedly failed to make the diagnosis or refer the patient to an ophthalmologist bilateral disease was present. recognition of the signs and symptoms of primary infantile glaucoma will allow physicians to refer infants and children at a time when good vision may be maintained in the majority of cases.

a retrospective analysis of infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia requiring prolonged hospitalization (greater than 100 days) was carried out to determine those factors associated with fatal outcome. twenty-three infants made up the study population. eleven infants died and 12 survived (survivors). no differences were noted between the groups regarding ventilator requirement, radiographic changes, and medication use (digoxin, aldactazide), except for furosemide which was used twice as frequently in the group of infants who died v the group of infants who survived (p less than .001). differences noted between the groups included moderate hypochloremia (chloride less than 80 meq/l) in all 11 infants who died v six of 12 survivors, severe hypochloremia (chloride less than 70 meq/l) in the nine of 11 infants who died v two of 12 survivors, metabolic alkalosis (ph greater than 7.45) in nine of 11 infants who died v three of 12 survivors, hypertension (systolic bp greater than 113 mm hg) in eight of 11 infants who died v one of 12 survivors, decrease in head growth in ten of the 11 infants who died v one of the 12 survivors; these differences were all significant (p less than .001). the metabolic alkalosis and head growth changes appear to be related to the hypochloremia. the data suggest that chloride deficiency may be an important contributing factor in the genesis of poor outcome in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia and that close attention to chloride supplementation might influence outcome.

four infants, aged 16 to 28 days (mean 23 days), were seen in the emergency room with acute cardiovascular collapse and with normal heart rate and rhythm. during evaluation for cardiovascular collapse, no infant had sepsis; cardiac assessment revealed normal intracardiac anatomy but global cardiac chamber enlargement and poor left ventricular systolic function, which resolved with supportive treatment. however, three of the four infants demonstrated ventricular preexcitation on their surface electrocardiogram and, subsequently, two infants had transient episodes of tachycardia. during a transesophageal pacing study to evaluate inducibility and electrophysiologic characteristics of tachycardia, sustained tachycardia was initiated in all four infants. reentrant tachycardia used an accessory atrioventricular connection as evidenced by the presence of preexcitation during sinus rhythm (three infants), the ability to initiate and terminate tachycardia by programmed electrical stimulation (four infants), minimum ventriculoatrial interval recorded in the esophagus (v-aeso) exceeded 70 ms (four infants), transient bundle branch block during tachycardia prolonged the cycle length and the v-aeso by 30 to 50 ms (three infants). findings in these infants suggested prior episodes of prolonged tachycardia as the probable etiology of the cardiovascular collapse.

at least 150,000 children currently reside in foster care in the united states because of child maltreatment. nearly 15% of all confirmed maltreatment reports record foster care as one of the acute interventions. yet, the impact of foster care has been largely unexamined. we conducted a historical cohort study of the impact of foster care on subsequent school performances for 114 children placed in foster care because of maltreatment. a comparison cohort was constituted of 106 maltreated children who were similar in age, race, sex, and year of diagnosis but who were left in their homes after report. school records were reviewed for 96 of the foster care children and 69 of the home care children. school attendance had improved for both groups at the time of follow-up nearly 8 years later. children in school at the time of report who were then placed in foster care missed an average of 15.6% of the school year prior to the report compared with missing only 3.48% of the most recent school year. the children from the comparison group missed an average of 8.5% of the school year prior to their index maltreatment report and 7.2% of their most recent year in school. forty-four percent of the foster care group achieved average or above average grades on follow-up compared with the passing rate for the home care group of 32% (p = .17). the foster care children were more likely to receive special education services. overall, both groups were doing poor work in school an average of 8 years after maltreatment report. there appears to be no evidence for a significant rehabilitative effect of foster care as measured by subsequent school performance.

good access to health care for all us children and youth remains an important social policy goal. recent patterns of access as reflected in the presence of regular care sources, health care use, health insurance coverage, and expenditures for medical care are described and analyzed using the subsample of all children 0 to 18 years of age from the 1980 national medical care utilization and expenditure survey. data from the survey indicate that in 1980, 92% of us children and youth had a regular care source and the same percentage were covered for the full year or part of the year by some form of public or private health insurance. however, use rates and patterns of expenditure continued to differ dramatically according to family background factors, particularly race, ethnicity, poverty status, and location of residence. these differences are analyzed and comparative data are presented for groups of children from various sociodemographic groups. minority-group and near-poor children were found to be at highest risk for limited utilization of services and inadequate insurance coverage.

there is no denying that health care costs have increased at an alarming rate, partially fueled by the increased demand created by programs such as medicaid. in 1983, the total federal and state outlays for medicaid were $35.6 billion. as the 1980s progress, we will see a variety of cost-containment strategies. these will include medicaid prepaid capitation projects, the initiation of copayments and deductibles, and further tightening of eligibility criteria. however, in our zeal to contain costs, let us not lose sight of or exacerbate the plight of the corridor poor. there are alternatives that will allow us to incorporate the disenfranchised and uninsured during the coming decade.

the changing patterns of neurologic and developmental functioning between 1 and 7 years of age were studied in very low-birth-weight infants (birth weight less than or equal to 1,500 g). subjects included 42 infants born in 1975 who were followed for 7 years. based on the 1-year neurologic assessment, 22 infants were classified as normal, 12 as suspect, and eight as abnormal. the three groups did not differ in birth weight, gestational age, sex, or hollingshead socioeconomic status (ses) score. the neurologic findings at 7 years of age were significantly related to the neurologic examination findings at 1 year of age. seventy-seven percent of the normal group, 58% of the suspect group, and 100% of the abnormal group remained in the same neurologic category at 7 years of age. children in the abnormal group had the greatest improvement in cognitive functioning between 1 and 7 years of age but did not achieve the iq level of children in the normal group. forty-five percent of the normal group, 75% of the suspect group, and 100% of the abnormal group had poor visual-motor integration. fifty-eight percent of the suspect group and 87% of the abnormal group were reading below age level. of the total sample, 54% required special education or resource help at 7 years of age, and the three groups differed significantly in their need for a special educational plan (p less than .05). these data indicate that a neurologic classification at 1 year of age provides a guide for monitoring very low-birth-weight infants and can be helpful in alerting school personnel to potential needs.

a 15-year longitudinal study of 369 children originally classified in second grade as exhibiting or not exhibiting behaviors commonly associated with attention deficit disorder was made. diagnostic data were collected on these children in second, fourth, and fifth grades and subsequent school performance was evaluated after ninth and twelfth grades. interviews were conducted 3 years after their graduation from high school. the ninth and twelfth grade records reveal that those who had previously been identified as showing behavior related to attention deficit disorder later performed significantly more poorly in school and had poorer social adjustment. interviews in early adulthood continued to reveal differences in outcome between normal subjects and those earlier classified as having attention deficit disorder. many of these differences could not be directly attributed to poor academic performance. a subgroup of students who were rated favorably by their elementary school teachers were found to perform better during high school than other members of the normal group in academic areas, but they generally did not differ from normal subjects in nonacademic areas.

immunocytochemical study of human brain showed creatine kinase brain isoenzyme (ckbb) present in both neurons and astrocytes. because creatine kinase brain isoenzyme is an intracellular enzyme that might be released with brain injury, its concentration in the csf of newborns was measured using a radioimmunoassay. infants who suffered a documented neurologic insult (a cerebroventricular hemorrhage or a cns infection) were found to have a greater mean csf creatine kinase brain isoenzyme concentration than those without a history of neurologic insult. infants with a high concentration had a poor short-term outcome (death or neurologic abnormality when discharged) more frequently than did those with a lower concentration. infants with a grade 3 or 4 cerebroventricular hemorrhage had a higher mean concentration than did those with a grade 1 or 2 hemorrhage. these data are consistent with the hypothesis that csf creatine kinase brain isoenzyme is a metabolic indicator of brain damage in newborns.

thirty-three full-term neonates were ranked blindly on a scale ranging from the least to the highest "risk" for future neurologic complications on the basis of available perinatal biographies, tests, and examinations performed during the newborn period. four prolonged polygraphic-behavioral recordings were obtained one week apart beginning at ten days after birth. five waking and sleep states were scored in each session as percentages of total observation time, giving a total of 20 scores for each baby to be subjected to analysis of variance. these measures also provided individual profile consistency or variability in maintaining waking-sleep states over the selected period of postnatal time. the whole cohort, except three infants who could not be followed adequately, was then reexamined periodically over a period ranging from 3 to 4 years (+/- 6 months) for neurologic and developmental assessments. except for two scores that produced a low level of statistical significance (p less than .05), the other 18 scores were found to be not associated with long-term outcomes. even the first two scores were not satisfactory discriminators for the outcome of the individual babies. however, when coefficients of concordance (w) were computed from each individual baby profile, significant statistics (p less than .001) emerged to indicate good correlations between high or low w values in the newborn period and long-term outcomes. all 17 newborns who had w scores greater than 0.9 were found to be normal at follow-up regardless of the poor ranking given several of them during the newborn period. among the 13 newborns who had w scores less than 0.9, 11 had a poor clinical outcome at follow-up, though several had been ranked initially as falling within the least "risk" group.

the dietary adherence of a sample of 97 patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus has been quantitatively described. now, in an effort to understand the poor dietary adherence found, diet-related knowledge and skill and their relationship to dietary adherence among 90 diabetic children have been studied. diet-related competencies assessed were the ability to: (1) recall the personal diet plan, (2) correctly fill one's plate from a buffet, with the diet plan in hand, and (3) choose an appropriate meal from a restaurant menu. adherence to the diet was assessed by unobtrusive observations at meals. error rates on the three tests of knowledge and skill were .21, .28, and .51, respectively. the mean error rate at mealtime was .35, only slightly higher than the error rate for filling a plate when the children knew they were being tested. in a multiple regression analysis, age (r = .37) and sex (r = .48) were associated with adherence to the diet plan. ability to choose correctly from a menu, duration of diabetes, and ability to correctly fill a plate from a buffet also entered the regression equation (r = .54). the data suggest that many children did not possess the knowledge and skill required for good dietary adherence, regardless of motivation. health educators may underestimate the complexity of the behaviors expected of chronically ill patients.

demographic background, attitude and knowledge about pregnancy and contraception, and family characteristics and dynamics of 100 teenage fathers were studied and compared with those of 100 nonfather, age-matched peers. the subjects' age ranged from 14 to 19 years with a mean age of 17.5 years. nearly all subjects were black and were from families of low socioeconomic status. there were no differences between the two groups for age at first sexual intercourse (mean 12.5 years) and frequency of intercourse in the last year. more control subjects than fathers perceived pregnancy as disruptive of their future plans for school, job, and marriage. teenage fathers were more likely to have mothers who were teenage parents (77% v 53%, p = .0007). in both groups, one third of their brothers and 44% of their sisters were teenage parents. both groups had poor knowledge about the risk of pregnancy and the effectiveness of contraceptives. in both groups, negative attitudes about contraceptives represent barriers to their use. both groups of subjects became sexually active at young ages, had poor knowledge about pregnancy prevention, and often had unprotected intercourse. although there were many similarities between the two groups, the teenage fathers, in particular, seemed to come from an environment in which teenage pregnancy was common, accepted, and perceived to be minimally disruptive of their lives now or in the future.

progressive diaphyseal dysplasia is characterized clinically by crippling leg pain, fatigue, headache, poor appetite, muscle weakness, and waddling gait. twelve affected patients, aged 2 years 4 months to 40 years, were treated with intermittent courses of low doses of prednisone given in a single dose on alternate mornings for periods ranging from 6 months to 10 years. the average initial dose of prednisone was 0.6 mg/kg/d, and average maintenance dose was 0.3 mg/kg/d. relief of all crippling symptoms was achieved in all patients. no untoward serious side effects have been observed, and the growth of children was not slowed. however, corticosteroid therapy should be restricted to patients suffering from crippling pain. the mechanism through which steroids act remains undefined.

the weaning process varies widely among different cultures as to when the practice is initiated and terminated; in the variety, quality, and quantity of the weaning foods; and in the manner in which the endogenous food is provided. the variations in practices range from providing a food source even before the first breast-feeding to feeding nothing but breast milk for as long as 9 to 12 months, and include feeding from a cupped hand to use of a modern feeding bottle. the advice often given healthy mothers is to breast-feed for as long as possible and compatible with life-style. most often, when breast-feeding is prolonged, the practice is to provide some complementary food from the early postpartum months onward. however, among some poor traditional societies and in deprived environments, this food may be limited and monotonous in flavor and texture. the monotony of the diet may act synergistically with the consequences of repeated infectious morbidity, and result in chronically depressed appetite and limited acceptance of additional food in quantity and variety at the time when this becomes critical for meeting the nutritional needs of the growing infant. the serious malnutrition prevalent in the 1 to 3 year olds in many deprived environments may have its antecedent etiology in the complementary feeding practices established in the first year of life. effective interventions to reverse growth faltering of infants reared in deprived environments where breast-feeding is prolonged may require increased attention to providing variety in the weaning diet from at least 4 months onward.

during a 10-year period, antibiotics were assigned in random, double-blind fashion in six combinations to treat 948 episodes of otitis media in children. exudate from the middle ear of all patients was cultured before treatment. three follow-up visits were conducted; the first follow-up visit was three to five days after the start of therapy, and the second and third visits were 14 and 31 days after onset of treatment. exudates were recultured for 75% of the patients on the first follow-up visit. comparison of treatment results showed that triple sulfonamide combined with either phenoxymethyl penicillin, or benzathine and procaine penicillin g given intramuscularly (im) was as effective as was ampicillin or amoxicillin. phenoxymethyl penicillin and cyclacillin alone were usually effective against pneumococci but relatively ineffective against haemophilus influenzae. cefaclor and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole produced unsatisfactory results in about half the cases caused by pneumococci or h influenzae. although production of beta-lactamase by some otitis-causing haemophilus and staphylococcus species may explain the ineffectiveness of some treatments, the percentage of organisms positive for beta-lactamase was too small to be responsible for the poor results with certain drugs.

between 1966 and 1976, heights and weights were determined yearly on all available children from 163 families who had had at least one child successfully treated for malnutrition between 1961 and 1971 and from eight families who had adopted such a child. between 1959 and 1976, a total of 72 fathers departed from these families: 12 died, 47 deserted, six were jailed, and seven left to look for work elsewhere. heights and weights as z scores and the weight age/height age ratios were analyzed, when available, during four periods around the date of the event: 6 to 18 months before (period 1b), 0 to 6 months before (period 2b), 0 to 6 months after (period 3a), and 6 to 18 months after (period 4a). mean z scores for all children measured in the period were already low (-0.26 +/- 0.93 and -0.25 +/- 0.95) during period 1b, were higher during period 2b, (-0.15 and 0.04), lower during period 3a (-0.39 and -0.46), and similar to original levels during period 4a (-0.37 and -0.27). mean weight age/height age was low (0.93 +/- 0.17) only during period 3a for children 2 to 18 years of age. in paired comparisons for children measured during any two periods there were significant increases in z height and z weight from periods 1b to 2b and from periods 1b to 4a in children less than 2 years of age and a significant decrease in the weight age/height age ratio from periods 1b to 3a in those 2 to 18 years of age. loss of father had little or no further impact on the already poor growth of these children.

to determine the association between time spent with middle ear effusion and development of speech and language, 205 three-year-old children were studied. each child had been followed prospectively from birth to record the number of episodes of middle ear disease and to document time spent with middle ear effusion. standardized tests of speech and language were administered at age 3 years to children who had spent much time with middle ear effusion and to children who had spent little or no time with middle ear effusion. children who had spent prolonged periods of time with middle ear effusion had significantly lower scores when compared with those who had spent little time with middle ear disease. the correlation was strongest in children from higher socioeconomic strata. time spent with middle ear effusion in the first 6 to 12 months of life was most strongly associated with poor scores.

to investigate the physical and psychological factors associated with labile diabetic control, 30 children and adolescents with recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis were included in a retrospective longitudinal review covering an 8-year period. the details of the ketoacidosis episodes and the psychosocial characteristics of the patient and his family were summarized from the medical record. only a minority of the ketoacidosis episodes were overtly and solely related to intercurrent illness or poor compliance. a majority of the subjects studied lived in families with substantial psychosocial dysfunction, including chronic unresolved interpersonal conflict, inadequate parenting, father not in home, financial stress, and lack of family involvement with the diabetes. many of the children displayed behavioral and personality problems. in most of these 30 cases, there was evidence that these dysfunctions existed prior to the onset of diabetes. these psychosocial problems were not immediately apparent in many instances, thus requiring more comprehensive psychosocial assessment and involvement by a social worker and/or a psychologist. ongoing emotional support and counseling were instrumental in reversing the pattern of recurrent ketoacidosis, in coordination with care by all members of the diabetes team. the findings from this experience suggest that recurrent ketoacidosis warrants prompt evaluation from a psychosocial as well as a physical perspective.

a pilot study investigated the neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral consequences of nonfatal infancy apnea. fifteen formerly apneic, monitored children were compared with age-similar siblings and with age-sex matched playmates. significant impairment in gross motor development and mild cognitive deficiencies were observed when those who had had apnea were compared with their siblings but not when contrasted with their playmates. lack of difference between those who had had apnea and playmates might have been due to a selection bias involving assortive friendships. the frequency and the severity of apneic episodes were associated but neither one showed a clear gradient of risk for poor outcome in the areas under study, indicating the possibility that apnea may have a threshold effect on subsequent development.

the role of a commonly ingested food additive, the preservative sodium metabisulfite (mbs), and aspirin (asa), in chronic asthma has been studied in 29 children. after 1 week on a strict elimination diet, all 29 children were challenged, in a single-blind fashion, in the pulmonary function laboratory on three consecutive days with placebo, mbs (capsule form and solution), and asa. children with a positive response to mbs were prescribed a diet that excluded foods containing mbs. patients with a positive response to asa were prescribed a diet excluding medications containing aspirin and natural salicylates. after 3 months on these restricted diets, the children were reassessed to determine whether there had been any therapeutic response. there was a 66% (19/29) incidence of positive challenge (greater than 20% decrease in forced expiratory volume in one second) with mbs and a 21% (6/29) incidence of positive challenge with asa. none of the children reacted to mbs in capsule form (maximum dose = 100 mg), but 19/29 reacted to mbs in solution with 30 ml of 0.5% citric acid. after 3 months on the restricted diet, four of 19 children on the mbs-free diet and one of six on the salicylate-free diet had objective signs of improvement, namely, reduction in asthma medications and/or improvement in lung function. unfortunately, compliance with the restrictive diet during this 3-month period was poor, particularly with the asa-sensitive children.(abstract truncated at 250 words)

of 521 children with a previously untreated nephrotic syndrome, as defined by proteinuria greater than or equal to 40 mg/h/m2 and serum albumin less than or equal to 2.5 g/dl, entering the international study of kidney disease in children between january 1967 and april 1976, 389 showed minimal changes on renal biopsy. of these, seven boys and three girls died, all before july 1972. infection was the cause of death in six patients. one child died of dural sinus thrombosis, one died as a result of cardiorespiratory failure following salt-poor albumin infusion, and another died from chronic renal failure due to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis not apparent on initial biopsy. the mode of death in the remaining child was uncertain. analysis according to histopathologic subgroups of minimal change disease showed no statistically significant differences in the incidence of deaths, although mesangial abnormalities and tubular atrophy were associated with higher mortality than nil disease or focal glomerular obsolescence. nine of the ten children who died had either failed to respond to initial prednisone therapy (initial nonresponders, n = 5), or responded but relapsed during the initial 8 weeks of treatment (early relapser, n = 4), even though only one quarter of the total sample were nonresponders or early relapsers (p less than .0005). nearly one fifth of all initial nonresponders with minimal change nephrotic syndrome died. thus the pattern of response to initial steroid therapy in patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome may have prognostic significance.

the extent to which children's psychological adjustment is affected by the presence of chronic physical illness is a subject of controversy. data obtained at entry to a study of children with chronic illness show that among the 81 children greater than or equal to 5 years of age there is little relationship between psychological adjustment and traditional morbidity measures such as days hospitalized and days in bed. there is, however, a moderate but significant relationship between psychological adjustment and both the number of days absent from school and the child's functional status: children who have more absences and those with poor functional status have poorer psychological adjustment. the data also suggest that these relationships may differ in size within demographic subgroups of the population, something that may explain current controversies over the relationship between the child's chronic condition and psychological adjustment.

poor compliance with contraceptive regimens has been shown to be an important antecedent of adolescent pregnancy. the purpose of this study was to test prospectively the effect of a peer v nurse counseling program on adolescent compliance with the use of oral contraceptives. fifty-seven females aged 14 to 19 years from a lower socioeconomic background were randomly assigned to a peer (n = 26) or nurse (n = 31) group. at the initial visit and at 1-, 2-, and 4-month follow-up visits, subjects received ortho-novum 1/35 combined with a tablet marker and were counseled by a nurse or peer. noncompliance was measured using a guttman scale consisting of: (1) avoidance of pregnancy, (2) appointment adherence, (3) pill count, and (4) urinary fluorescence for riboflavin. at the first and second follow-ups, the adolescents counseled by a peer had a significantly (p less than or equal to .038) lower noncompliance level than the nurse-counseled group. adolescents with more frequent sexual activity (p less than or equal to .027), with one sexual partner (p less than .04), and who worried that they might become pregnant (p less than or equal to .01) had significantly lower levels of noncompliance when counseled by a peer than by a nurse. at the fourth month follow-up, adolescents who expressed feelings of hopelessness about the future had significantly (p less than or equal to .036) higher levels of noncompliance when counseled by a nurse than when counseled by a peer. these results suggest that incorporating a peer counselor into the health care team may be an effective method of increasing adolescent compliance.

the wellcogen strep b latex assay rapidly identifies all cases of culture-positive sepsis and meningitis and may be more sensitive than standard culture techniques for identifying group b streptococcus disease and assessing the degree of severity. the quantitation of antigen concentration combined with the peripheral wbc count proves helpful in predicting poor outcome.

of all patients with intraventricular hemorrhage, those with hemorrhagic intracerebral involvement exhibit the highest rates of mortality and neurologic morbidity and, indeed, account for the vast majority of all neurologic impairment in infants with intraventricular hemorrhage. insight into the basic nature of the critical cerebral involvement requires determination of regional cerebral blood flow, previously not possible. positron emission tomography (pet) now provides the capability of measuring regional cerebral blood flow with high resolution and little risk. in this study, we utilized pet in six premature infants (920 to 1,200 g) with major intraventricular hemorrhage and hemorrhagic intracerebral involvement to measure regional cerebral blood flow during the acute period (5 to 17 days of age). cerebral blood flow was determined after intravenous injection of h2o, labeled with the positron-emitting isotope, 15o (oxygen 15). findings were similar and dramatic in all six infants. in the area of hemorrhagic intracerebral involvement, little or no cerebral blood flow was detected. however, in addition, surprisingly, a marked two- to fourfold reduction in cerebral blood flow was observed throughout the affected hemisphere, well posterior and lateral to the intracerebral hematoma, including cerebral white matter and, to a lesser extent, frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex. in the one infant studied a second time, ie, at 3 months of age, the extent and severity of the decreased cerebral blood flows in the affected hemisphere were similar to those observed on the study during the neonatal period. at the three autopsies, the affected left hemisphere showed extensive infarction, corroborating the pet scans. these observations, the first demonstration of the use of pet in the determination of regional cerebral blood flow in the newborn, show marked impairments in regional cerebral blood flow in the hemisphere containing an apparently restricted intracerebral hematoma, indicating that the hemorrhagic intracerebral involvement is only a component of a much larger lesion, ischemic in basic nature, ie, an infarction. this large ischemic lesion explains the poor neurologic outcome in infants with intraventricular hemorrhage and hemorrhagic intracerebral involvement.

of 603 patients undergoing serologic tests for toxoplasma, syphilis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex (torch tests) during a 4-year period, 381 (63%) were infants younger than 6 months and 110 (18%) were either the mothers of those infants or pregnant women. the remaining 112 (19%) were older infants and children, male adults, or nonpregnant female adults. of 381 infants less than 6 months of age who were tested, 323 (85%) had only a single torch test. of 35 (9%) infants who had follow-up titers, 16 (46%) had a specific titer requested whereas in 19 (54%) the entire torch battery was repeated. follow-up titers were infrequently (25%) requested when initial titers were elevated. infection with a torch agent was not confirmed serologically in any of the 603 patients. the pattern of torch test use has a poor diagnostic return.

fifty-nine children with neurogenic tumors were examined for the presence of hypertension. eleven of the 59 (19%) were found to have elevated blood pressure levels at the time of diagnosis or with progression of their disease. several antihypertensive agents produced poor or only partial pressure control. all blood pressure levels returned to normal values after tumor excision or administration of effective antitumor therapy. there was no correlation of hypertension with urinary catecholamine levels. the etiologies of hypertension in children with neurogenic tumors are discussed.

it has been widely reported that adolescent mothers are more likely to experience poor pregnancy outcome, especially low-birth-weight and/or premature infants. recent data suggest that this poor outcome may be attributed to confounding health and social characteristics of adolescent mothers. a study of maternal health and neonatal development at boston city hospital provided an opportunity to assess whether adolescent mothers deliver infants with poorer outcomes at birth than nonadolescents independent of numerous social and health differences between adolescent and nonadolescent mothers. a total of 275 infants of primiparous adolescents (aged 13 to 18 years) were compared at birth with 423 infants of primiparous nonadolescents. size at birth, length of gestation, apgar scores, and birth trauma were examined. the only statistically significant difference between the two groups was that adolescent mothers delivered infants whose mean weight was 94 g less (p less than .03) than infants of nonadolescent mothers. multiple and logistic regression analyses demonstrated that several health and social factors, but not adolescent status, were independently associated with the measures of adverse infant outcome. a subsequent regression analysis demonstrated similarly that being a younger adolescent (16 years and younger) did not independently predict low birth weight at delivery or other measured adverse neonatal outcomes. these data support the view that health and social factors are more important to poor fetal outcome among primiparous mothers than adolescent status. some of the health factors are amenable to clinical intervention.

during a 6-year period, 23 navajo adolescents were hospitalized 47 times for presumed lead intoxication secondary to gasoline sniffing. most patients were male (87%) and sniffed gasoline as a social activity, more frequently in spring and summer. sixty-five percent of the patients first presented with toxic encephalopathy. of total episodes, 31% involved asymptomatic lead overload; 31% involved tremor, ataxia, and other neurologic signs; and 38% involved encephalopathy with disorientation and hallucinations. free erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels were not consistently high, although blood lead levels were all elevated. one death occurred. approximately 11% of 537 navajo adolescents said they inhaled gasoline for enjoyment at least occasionally. among 147 junior high school students, blood lead levels averaged 18 +/- 6 micrograms/dl with no values greater than 40 micrograms/dl. three of these students had elevated zinc protoporphyrin levels and all three were anemic. no correlation was found between levels of blood lead or zinc protoporphyrin and whether or not the youth reported sniffing gasoline. however, sniffing gasoline was associated with poor school performance and delinquent behavior. although apparently many navajo adolescents experiment with gasoline inhalation, only a few engage in this activity frequently enough to develop either asymptomatic or symptomatic lead overload.

one measure used to prevent overwhelming sepsis due to streptococcus pneumoniae in children with defective splenic function is oral penicillin prophylaxis. however, a frequently cited argument against this approach is the likelihood of poor compliance. compliance was studied by examining urine specimens for penicillin by the sarcina lutea disc diffusion technique in 22 surgically asplenic children, two patients following bone marrow transplantation, and 38 infants and young children with sickle cell disease. multiple specimens (mean 3.5 per patient) were examined in 43 of the children. overall, 125/188 (66%) of the urine samples contained penicillin, indicating compliance within the previous 12 to 24 hours. compliance tended to improve on subsequent clinic visits. these relatively good results were attributed to an intensive educational program in which repetitive efforts are made to counsel patients and parents about the risks of life-threatening infection. poor compliance should no longer be invoked as a reason not to study the efficacy of prophylactic penicillin in functionally or surgically asplenic subjects.

from the population of a neonatal intensive care unit, 114 infants and their families were followed from birth to age 3 1/2 years. infants showing massive brain damage at birth and/or severe mental retardation at 7 months of age were excluded from this analysis. the remainder were predominantly poor and nonwhite. the group showed normal cognitive development through age 15 months. by 28 months of age and thereafter, a severe decline in cognitive status proved to be associated with social class. in addition, serious behavioral maladjustment led to improverished cognitive development. the incidence of maladjustment was unrelated to social class. the impact of maladjustment on test scores was significant in all classes, but greater for the higher rather than the lower socioeconomic social groups. neither neurologic pathology (excepting severe brain damage) nor gestational age (small for gestation age [sga] vs appropriate for gestational age [aga]) had a significant effect on iq scores at 3 1/2 years of age. it is suggested that environmental deficits and stresses impair early cognitive and psychosocial development for both full-term and premature infants, but that the latter group is more vulnerable to environmental insufficiencies than are full-term babies.

fifty-four premenarcheal patients (median age 5.8 years) with symptoms or signs of vulvovaginitis were studied, and the results of cultures of vaginal secretions were compared with those from an age-matched control group. vaginal discharge was found on examination in 24 of 42 patients with a complaint of discharge, and in two of 12 patients without a complaint of discharge. convincing evidence of bacterial or monilial infection was found in 14 of the 26 patients with discharge on examination, but in none of the 28 patients without discharge (p less than .001). in the latter group pinworm infestation was present in one patient. moniliasis occurred exclusively in girls who were pubertal (p less than .001). four patients were found to have gonorrhea. no patient appeared to have symptoms or signs caused by bacteroides sp, chlamydia trachomatis, viruses, or trichomonas vaginalis. noninfectious causes were identified in four patients with and 13 without discharge (p less than .025); the most common cause was poor hygiene, implicated in six patients. bubble bath use was implicated in only one patient. in 22 patients, no specific cause could be identified. all patients with poor hygiene as the only cause, and most with no demonstrable etiology, recovered after being advised to institute improved perineal hygiene. patients with vaginal discharge are likely to have specific infections, and therefore cultures should be taken, in particular for neisseria gonorrhoeae. genital pruritus in prepubertal girls has little or no etiologic specificity, but in pubertal girls with vaginal discharge it suggests the presence of monilial vaginitis.

because there is an association between the lack of knowledge of normal child development, high and unrealistic expectations for a child's performance, and child abuse, a questionnaire about normal child development, child health maintenance, child discipline aspects of childrearing, and child development was given to a representative sample of high school students in iowa. though high school students in iowa rank high in academic performance, the results of this study indicated that students in grades 9 through 12 had a poor knowledge of child development and child health maintenance. students whose highest probability of response to a child discipline problem was either to punish or abuse knew less about child development and child health maintenance than their peers. boys at all grade levels knew less about child development and child health maintenance and were more likely to choose punishment and abuse than girls. though the causes for child abuse are multifactorial and complex, there is a need to guarantee that all who are at risk for parenthood be informed about child development, child health maintenance, and child discipline to minimize the effects that ignorance of these factors may have on their approaches to discipline and their potential for child abuse.

available evidence regarding the relationship between socioeconomic status and health in childhood has been summarized. only studies that used income, education, or occupation as measures of socioeconomic status and provided data obtained subsequent to legislation facilitating access to care have been cited. data are presented on the prevalence and severity of illness (mortality, acute conditions as a group, chronic conditions as a group, and hospitalization), sequelae of prematurity, and specific common health problems and their sequelae. these specific health problems are lead poisoning, vision problems, otitis media and hearing loss, cytomegalic inclusion disease, asthma, psychosocial and psychosomatic problems, and iron deficiency anemia. all of the above (with the possible exception of asthma) are more prevalent among poor children than among nonpoor children. even more striking is the evidence for consistently greater severity of problems or likelihood of sequelae among poor children. although causality cannot be inferred from these data, the findings suggest a need for more basic research on the social correlates of disease, on the effect of social progress on disease prevalence and severity, and on the effect of medical care in overcoming the disadvantage associated with low socioeconomic status.

specific immunoglobulin m antibodies were detected by radioimmunoassay (ria-igm) in cord sera from 83/93 (89%) babies congenitally infected with cytomegalovirus (cmv) but in 0/104 cord sera from uninfected control subjects. the type of maternal infection did not affect the ability of the assay to identify congenital infections, but increased ria-igm titers were found more frequently in cord sera from babies infected following primary cmv infections (9/18; 50%) than following recurrent cmv infections (1/12; 8%) (p less than .05). the magnitude of the fetal immune response was related to disease inasmuch as 14/40 (35%) babies with increased ria-igm titers were symptomatic at birth compared with 1/43 (2%) with lower titers (p less than .001). when combined with the results of testing for rheumatoid factor and total igm, the ria-igm assay defined subgroups of babies with generally poor (7/15; 47% symptomatic at any stage) or generally good (0/21 symptomatic) prognoses. prospective studies currently identifying cases of congenital cmv infection may wish to use these three serologic techniques as the results obtained appear to have prognostic significance for those babies who are initially asymptomatic.

one hundred eleven consecutive infants with neonatal hyperviscosity were identified by screening all newborns for polycythemia in an 18-month period. these polycythemic infants were matched with non-polycythemic newborns for birth weight, gestational age, apgar scores, and sex. maternal, intrapartum, and neonatal data were analyzed for associated morbidity. maternal preeclampsia was more common among the hyperviscous patients than among control subjects. hypoglycemia was also significantly increased among the hyperviscous patients. follow-up studies at 1 to 3 years of age revealed a significantly higher incidence (38% vs 11%) of motor and neurologic abnormalities in the infants with neonatal hyperviscosity. the data suggested that concurrent hypoglycemia increased the risk of a poor outcome in hyperviscous infants inasmuch as 55% of infants with both characteristics were abnormal at follow-up. this, however, was not significantly different from the outcome of infants with hyperviscosity alone (p greater than .05 but less than .1). further studies will be needed to confirm or deny this relationship.

the role of maternally acquired antibody to native type iii polysaccharide of group b streptococcus as a determinant of susceptibility for infant systemic infection was investigated. sera from 111 acutely ill infants with type iii group b streptococcal bacteremia and/or meningitis and their mothers, and cord sera from 45 healthy neonates and their mothers who had type iii group b streptococcal vaginal colonization at delivery were studied. sera from each of 111 acutely ill infants contained very low levels of antibody (less than 1.7 microgram/ml, median 0.4 microgram/ml), and a significant correlation with maternal levels was tested for early onset infection (median 0.6 microgram/ml; 4 = .76; p less than .01). women whose infants remained well had antibody levels greater than 2 microgram/ml in their sera (73%) more often than those whose infants developed symptomatic infection (17%) (p less than .001), and the median level in their sera (12.6 microgram/ml) was considerably higher. study of sera obtained during convalescence from 86 surviving infants indicated a poor antibody response to infection. in contrast, high levels of antibody were detected in sera from each of five convalescent women with postpartum bacteremia. these data extend earlier observations suggesting the correlation between low levels of type-specific antibody in serum and risk for systemic infection with type iii strains of group b streptococci.

cardiac tamponade is a rare complication of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. three cases seen in the last two years at the children's hospital of philadelphia are reported and compared to four previously reported cases. all three children had systemic-type juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with tachypnea, shortness of breath, and chest pain. cardiac signs in these children included decreased heart sounds, pericardial friction rub, jugular venous distention, and pulsus paradoxus greater than 12 mm hg. roentgenograms of the chest showed cardiomegaly with bilateral pleural effusions. electrocardiograms showed sinus tachycardia and nonspecific st-t wave changes. echocardiograms demonstrated pericardial effusions in all subjects and poor ventricular movements in one child. all three children were treated with short-acting anti-inflammatory drugs and/or prednisone. pericardiocentesis was performed in two cases. there was no significant morbidity after a mean follow-up of two years.

between june 1979 and june 1980, 16 infants with cystic fibrosis (cf) were cared for at the james whitcomb riley hospital for children. five of these children (average age 5.8 months) had a total of eight episodes of electrolyte depletion, with six episodes unassociated with high environmental temperature, fever, or significant gastrointestinal symptoms. their primary symptoms were poor weight gain and anorexia. according to their dietary records, these five infants, at the time of their initial presentation, had an average electrolyte intake of 8 meq of sodium, 12 meq of potassium, and 10 meq of chloride per day. all infants had been fed either standard infant formula or breast milk. infant feeding surveys indicate that the estimated average sodium intake of 6-month-old infants has decreased from 45 meq/day in 1965 to 15 meq/day since 1977 when manufacturers stopped adding salt to baby foods. in addition, since 1971 the percentage of infants 6 months age receiving breast milk or standard infant formula rather than cow's milk, which is higher in sodium content, has increased from 33% to 72%. this decreased salt intake places the infant with cf at greater risk for electrolyte depletion than in the past. it is expected that a larger percentage of infants with cf will have electrolyte depletion as their initial symptom especially during periods of increased sweating or when electrolyte losses are experienced during gastrointestinal illnesses. cf should be suspected in any infant with electrolyte depletion, and infants known to have cf need daily salt supplementation. serum electrolytes should be measured if the infant is experiencing weight loss or anorexia, particularly during periods of excessive salt losses.

the total creatine phosphokinase (cpk) activity and the levels of activity of its mm, mb and bb isoenzymes were measured in sera obtained within four hours after birth from 32 newborn infants. the total cpk level and activity of its mm, mb, and bb isoenzymes increased significantly with increasing acidosis. in addition, statistically significant correlations were found between the total cpk level in infants' sera and their one-minute apgar scores. the infants' birth weight, gestational age, and mode of delivery did not correlate significantly with the serum total cpk activity. infants who died within ten days after birth from causes related to asphyxia had significantly higher total cpk activity levels in their sera in comparison with the survivors. the data suggest that perinatal asphyxia with acidosis may result in the leakage of cpk and its isoenzymes from the damaged cells into the circulation and that a marked elevation of their values may indicate a poor prognosis for survival.

screening neonates for methylmalonic aciduria is part of routine screening for metabolic disorders in massachusetts. the process of urine collection by the parent and transmitted to the central screening laboratory was described in a previous publication (pediatrics 49: 825, 1972). the primary objective of screening for methylmalonic aciduria is to detect methylmalonic acidemia, an inherited organic acid disorder. during the most recent 5 1/2-year period when the sensitive fast blue b stain was used in the analysis, four infants with methylmalonic acidemia were detected among 293,535 screened. additional infants and children who came to attention because of clinical illness or family study also could be readily detected. prior to this period, 325,634 neonates had been screened with the aniline-xylose method, which proved to be not sensitive enough for the identification of methylmalonic aciduria. some affected infants have responded well to therapy and are clinically normal while two have shown poor biochemical response and are developmentally delayed. four children in two families appear to have a benign variant of methylmalonic acidemia. based on these studies the observed incidence of methylmalonic acidemia in massachusetts is 1:48,000. screening for methylmalonic aciduria may be an appropriate addition to newborn screening programs.

hepatobiliary scintigraphy with technetium 99m-labeled p-isopropylacetanilido iminodiacetic acid (99mtc-pipida) was used to evaluate 22 neonates with mixed jaundice. ten patients were proved to have biliary atresia; ten others were diagnosed as having neonatal hepatitis. in the remaining two, jaundice was secondary to prolonged hyperalimentation. initial studies in all ten patients with biliary atresia showed no evidence of excretion of the tracer into the intestinal tract. following three to seven days of oral administration of phenobarbital, repeat studies were performed in six of the ten patients. none showed evidence of excretion. initial studies of the 12 patients with intrahepatic cholestasis showed definite excretion in five, questionable evidence of excretion in two, and no demonstrable excretion in five. studies after phenobarbital therapy in five of the seven patients with questionable or no excretion on the initial studies showed definite excretion in four. only in one patient who had poor hepatic extraction did the phenobarbital therapy not change the scintigraphic pattern. the authors conclude that hepatobiliary scintigraphy with 99mtc-pipida after three to seven days of phenobarbital therapy is a highly accurate test for differentiating biliary atresia from other causes of neonatal jaundice.

vidarabine (adenine arabinoside) was evaluated for treatment of neonatal herpes simplex virus infection in a randomized controlled study. of 56 infected newborns, 13 had infection of skin, eye, or mouth only, 16 had localized brain disease (cns), and 27 had disseminated disease. both treatment and placebo groups were comparable by disease distribution and for major population characteristics. because of the severity of cns and disseminated disease, these groups were combined for mortality assessment. mortality was significantly reduced in babies with cns and disseminated disease from 74% to 38% with drug therapy, p = .014. outcome in babies with disseminated disease alone, although improved, was poor. death rate was reduced from 85% to 57% with therapy. only 14% of drug and 8% of placebo recipients were assessed as normal at 1 year of age. outcome was better with localized cns disease; mortality was reduced from 50% to 10%. with treatment, 50% of infected newborns were normal and without only 17%. with skin, eye, or mouth infection death did not occur; however, severe sequelae occurred in 38% of placebo and minor sequelae in 25% of drug recipients. no evidence of acute toxicity was identified in this study. thus, a beneficial effect of vidarabine therapy on neonatal herpes simplex infection is similar to that evident with therapy of herpes simplex encephalitis occurring in older individuals. nevertheless, improvement in the mode of therapy or the development of more potent antiviral drugs is essential.

the ability of newborns to digest proteins, fats, and carbohydrates depends, to a large extent, on their level of exocrine pancreatic function. building on the limited published data, we studied pancreatic enzyme activities in the duodenal fluid and the response of the exocrine pancreas to secretogogues in 15 premature and full-term infants at birth and at 30 days of age. we compared these findings to those obtained from identical studies of 17 children age 2 years and above. in addition, we measured the pancreatic exopeptidase, carboxypeptidase b, in relation to other pancreatic enzymes. the duodenal fluid of newborns and infants contained no amylase and negligible lipase. carboxypeptidase b levels were also low compared to those in the older children. in contrast, chymotrypsin activity in infants was about 50% to 60% of level found in the older children. trypsin activity, the highest of all the enzymes measured, was about the same in both newborns and older children, with a transient increase at 30 days. administration of pancreozymin had no effect on pancreatic enzymes in the duodenal fluid of newborns and a slight effect on 1-month-old infants. but by age 2 years, a full response of the pancreas to pancreozymin was evident. in infants and newborns, responses to secretin were poor. thus, the secretory response of the human pancreas to secretogogues, absent or minimal at birth, is acquired during the postnatal period.

five children (aged 11 to 19 years) with lifelong chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis had 12 episodes of esophageal and/or laryngeal candidiasis documented by endoscopy. symptoms included hoarseness (8/12), dysphagia (6/12), and hemoptysis (1/12). there was poor correlation between oral lesions and esophageal or laryngeal involvement. on fiberoptic endoscopy, the esophagus was involved alone in four episodes (33%), the larynx in two episodes (17%), and both structures in six episodes (50%). in six of eight instances, the esophagram was nondiagnostic or markedly underestimated the extent of inflammation. intravenous amphotericin b or miconazole resulted in the resolution of these infections for variable periods of time. repeat endoscopy was used to follow the course of the disease. aerosolized amphotericin b was effective on one occasion in clearing candidal lesions of the larynx and one small area of the left mainstem bronchus. oral topical therapy was not beneficial. since the signs and symptoms of laryngitis or esophagitis are often minimal or absent and complications, including strictures, may arise from chronic inflammation, periodic endoscopy and systemic therapy may be necessary.

in this study in seven primary care facilities the proportion of children recognized as having behavioral, educational, or social problems was much higher than generally assumed. although there was great variability among the facilities, at least 5% and as many as 15% of children seen in one year were diagnosed as having these problems in all but the hospital teaching facilities. the prevalence was even higher among children from poor families. the variability among facilities was much less for psychosomatic problems, which were diagnosed in 8% to 10% of the children. for both psychosocial and psychosomatic types of problems, but especially for psychosocial ones, the proportion of visits with the diagnoses was much lower than the proportion of children with them, so that these problems engendered fewer visits for their management than might have been expected from their frequency in the population. however, available evidence suggests that individuals with unresolved psychosocial problems make more than their share of visits for other diagnoses. the findings of this study have implications for the content of educational programs for primary care practitioners, for the organization of primary care practice, and for the current debate over policy concerning reimbursement and benefit packages.

a review of 233 cases of childhood strangulation was made to determine injury epidemiology. consistent patterns of injury were observed. crib and playground equipment strangulations are already the subject of consumer product safety commission (cpsc) preventative regulations. high chair-, playpen mesh-, pacifier cord-, and clothing-related injuries would be amenable to prevention by improved product safety regulation. the cpsc has been petitioned to remedy the first two of these hazards. many crib and rope strangulations can only be prevented by direct patient counseling. although congress empowered and required the cpsc to recognize and correct unsafe products, its surveillance systems may obscure the very design defects that cause injury. likewise, political considerations may slow enactment of new design regulations. physicians who treat childhood accident victims are in a position to recognize hazardous products and lobby for their improvement. of the 233 cases 38 were further evaluated to delineate the clinical course of childhood strangulation. victims who fail to resume normal cardiopulmonary function by the time of hospitalization have a poor prognosis for neurologic recovery with current modes of therapy. improved treatment of hypoxic and ischemic cerebral injury might prevent some of the deaths and handicaps resulting from strangulation.

between 1969 and 1978 we treated 22 low birth weight infants for delayed onset posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. all developed clinical signs of hydrocephalus after 2 weeks of age. the diagnosis was determined in 12 infants before august 1974, and they were treated by surgical placement of a shunt. in the ten infants born after september 1974, an attempt was first made to control the hydrocephalus with repeated lumbar puncture and diuretics prior to placing a shunt. in seven of the ten the hydrocephalus was successfully arrested by medical therapy alone. follow-up assessments at 1 to 8 years of age were done on 18 infants. two of the 12 treated by permanent shunts and three of six treated medically had an iq score of 85 or greater. these results indicate a poor long-term outlook for the low birth weight infant who develops clinically overt hydrocephalus after intracranial bleeding.

this randomized controlled trial of nutritional supplementation in pregnancy, in a poor black urban population in the united states, aimed to increase the birth weight and influence the postnatal development of the offspring of mothers at high risk of having low birth weight infants. the execution of the research design and adherence to the treatment regimen among the experimental population appeared adequate for a reasonable test of the treatments. at birth, the only significant favorable effect of supplementation observed was the prevention of depressed birth weight among the offspring of mothers who smoked heavily. with balanced protein-calorie supplementation, length of gestation was increased, the proportion of low-birth-weight infants reduced, and mean birth weight raised by 41 gm (not statistically significant). with high protein supplementation, there was an excess of very early premature births and associated neonatal deaths, and there was significant growth retardation up to 37 weeks of gestation. at 1 year of age, significant effects of high protein supplement were found on three psychological measures: visual habituation, visual dishabituation, and mean length of free play episodes. these measures were unrelated to measures of growth at birth and at 1 year of age. there were no detectable residual adverse effects of high protein supplementation at 1 year of age.

the west syndrome and the lennox-gastaut syndrome are characterized by their onset in infancy and early childhood, intractable seizures occurring almost daily, severe psychomotor retardation, and poor prognosis. among handicapped children, they offer the most serious problems in daily care at home or in institutions because of frequent attacks and marked retardation. a nationwide survey in japan was performed to elucidate the natural history of these two syndromes.

amebiasis, that is, infection with entameba histolytica, continues to be endemic in the united states, with liver abscess occurring as an infrequent but constant complication. seven cases are reported, with epidemiologic investigation of two. reliable findings in hepatic abscess include fever, abdominal pain, respiratory distress, tender abdomen, and large, tender liver. anemia, elevated white count with left shift, and the radiographic findings of an elevated right hemidiaphragm are constant. epidemiologically, amebiasis occurs in clusters in the united states with person-to-person transmission predominant in spread. infection is associated with poor sanitation and crowding. investigation of the families of two patients documented 9/21 carriers and an additional 3/21 who were seropositive, as well as crowding and poor sanitation. in this country, treatment of a patient with amebic disease should include investigation of his home and family.

aggregation studies were performed on platelets from five patients with bartter's syndrome. epinephrine failed to induce aggregation in all five patients. adenosine 5'-diphosphate (adp) produced a single reversible phase of aggregation, and there was depressed sensitivity to collagen. response to ristocetin was normal. there was a dose-related inhibition of adp-induced platelet aggregation when plasma from the patients was addeded to normal platelet-rich plasma. this inhibition was diminished or absent when patients were receiving aspirin. washed platelets from two patients who were no longer undergoing aspirin therapy, showed a normal response to epinephrine in normal platelet-poor plasma. bleeding time was reduced from 23 minutes to 12 minutes in one patient while on aspirin therapy. these studies suggest that a circulating inhibitor of platelet aggregation, probably of prostaglandin origin, is present in the plasma  of patients with bartter's syndrome.

a 6-month-old infant with primary malignant cutaneous lymphoma is presented. the histologic differentiation between benign cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia and cutaneous malignant lymphoma is discussed. intensive therapy is warranted at the onset because of early dissemination and poor response to treatment after dissemination.

the purposes of this study were to investigate the attentional characteristics of hyperactive children, the relationship of subjective and objective measures of these characteristics, and the effects of methylphenidate on these measures of attention. forty-five hyperactive children, ages 6 to 10 years, were entered into an 18-week study of the effects of methylphenidate (ritalin) on attention. measures included rating scales completed by teachers and parents and a vigilance task. all measures reflected significant changes during the period of investigation. attention and behavior were significantly improved under drug conditions and significantly worsened when methylphenidate was discontinued. however, only performance on the objective measure returned to predrug levels; final off-drug parent and teacher ratings remained improved over initial reports. parent ratings of behavior, and specifically of children's ability to attend, were unrelated to equivalent teacher ratings. teachers' ratings of attention correlated significantly with performance on the vigilance task, discriminated between on-drug and off-drug conditions, and discriminated between children who obtained normal or near normal predrug scores on the objective measure and those who performed poorly on this measure. methylphenidate improved attentional performance for children who had poor predrug scores on the vigilance task, but did not produce a statistically significant change on the scores of children with normal predrug performance.

five infants with neonatal tetanus were managed with neuromuscular blockade and positive pressure ventilation. all survived. tetanus was frequently confused with neonatal seizures at time of presentation. all infants were delivered at home. mean age of onset of symptoms of poor suck, hypertonicity, and generalized spasms was 5.4 days with hospital admission at 6.4 days. mean duration of mechanical ventilation was 34 days. although hospital management of tetanus neonatorum may be expected to have a satisfactory outcome, it represents a costly and complex approach to a preventable disease.

in a ten-year period we identified 305 hospitalized children with a pneumococcal bacteremia. from these children 293 pneumococcal isolates were serotyped, and 90% belonged to a group of 11 "prevalent serotypes." these 11 serotypes were the prevalent serotypes isolated from children in all disease categories, as well as from children with sickle-cell disease. no more than 1% of the isolates belonged to any one of the other serotypes. a pneumococcal vaccine effective against these 11 prevalent serotypes should be optimal for use in children. our highest case fatality rates were noted in children with meningitis (13%) and children with sickle-cell disease (20%). a polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine might not have prevented most of our pneumococcal meningitis, as 80% of these children were less than 1 year old, an age when polysaccharide vaccines are poor antigens. on the other hand, many of our children with sickle-cell disease acquired their pneumococcal bacteremia at an older age and should have benefitted from such a vaccine.

we have reviewed the iq studies on 68 children with skeletal dysplasia. these data should provide useful information for the counseling of parents with newborn affected children. previous studies have documented retardation and hydrocephalus in association with achondroplasia. some parents report that they were given a poor prognosis for their child's mental development early in his or her life. this study shows that the 34 children with achondroplasia and 34 with other skeletal dysplasia performed intellectually in the same range as other children.

skill in reading is desirable. however, the importance of reading may be overemphasized in schools. reading skills are determined relatively and not absolutely. thus, relatively poor readers will persist. schools cannot eradicate individual differences. biological makeup and societal pressures are the important factors in determining reading skill. present methods of reading remediation are of questionable efficacy and are traumatic to some children. time with its associated normal development succeeds in remediating the majority of children with dyslexia. most poor readers eventually attain reading levels that enable them to comprehend the types of printed materials commonly encountered. if a child finds reading difficult or distasteful, that child should be encouraged to read but should have the right not to be forced to read.

a prospective study was made of 42 children who were found at birth to have sex chromosome aberrations. the mean developmental quotient of the xxy and xxx groups was in the dull-normal range, whereas developmental quotients of 3 xyy children were low normal. the commonest deficits were in language and gross motor skills, with highest incidence in the xxx group. many of the children had behavior problems, but no specific pattern was associated with an individual chromosome aberration. the xxx group experienced a linear growth spurt after 4 years of age. with one exception there were only mild dysmorphic features, none of them specifically associated with any subgroup. of 17 children followed up to school age, almost two thirds evidenced learning and/or behavior problems. there was a high incidence of birth problems particularly in xxx children (seven of ten), and of social problems, psychiatric illness and learning difficulties in their families. in 14 cases, the parent-child relationship was disturbed, resulting in behavior problems. these findings make it improbable that the children's generally poor developmental and behavioral performance were solely attributable to their chromosomal constitution.

the postneonatal infant mortality (pnim) of 2,205 infants admitted to a neonatal intensive care unit from january 1971 to december 1974 was 44 in 1,000 infants who survived to age 28 days. this rate is approximately ten times that of the general population. congenital malformations (59%), infections (12%), sudden infant death syndrome (10%), and asphyxial brain damage (10%) were the most common causes of death. one third (26) of the infants remained in the hospital whereas two thirds (52) had been dismissed prior to death. all who remained in the hospital plus 36 who had been dismissed died of severe illnesses that were incompatible with prolonged survival. the remaining pnim was 10 in 1,000 neonatal survivors. this rate is still twice that of the general population. these deaths occurred in infants who were apparently well at the time of dismissal and subsequent examinations. sudden infant death syndrome and infections constituted the largest portion of this mortality. factors contributing to mortality in this group were poor socioeconomic status and low birth weight. maternal age, race, marital status, and neonatal illnesses including apnea were not significantly related. factors that appear to be important in the birth of high-risk infants continued to be operative in the postneonatal period, and contribute to a high mortality in apparently normal infants dismissed from the neonatal intensive care unit.

initial urinary catecholamine metabolite and amino acid excretion patterns were examined in 54 children with neuroblastoma. the relationships between prognosis and age at diagnosis, stage of disease, primary site, and histologic grade of tumor were similar in this population to those found in previous studies, but only age and stage were found to be independent prognostic variables. prognosis in disseminated disease was found to correlate directly with the urinary vanilmandelic acid (vma)/homovanillic acid (hva) ratio but not with the absolute levels of hva. the presence of the dopa metabolite, vanillactic acid, as well as increased amounts of cystathionine and/or low levels of vma indicated poor prognosis. these results are consistent with the hypothesis that biochemically primitive neuroblastomas deficient in dopamine beta-hydroxylase are move virulent than their mature analogues which produce epinephrine, norepinephrine, and their metabolites.

simultaneous serum concentrations of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (dhea-s) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-ohp) were compared with urinary 17-ketosteroid (17-ks) and pregnanetriol (pt) excretion during therapy in 18 prepubertal patients with the 21-hydroxylase deficiency form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (cah). patients were classified into those in good, poor, or questionable control on the basis of clinical examination, skeletal age, and 17-ks and pt excretion. during therapy, use of serum steroid concentrations was found to be nearly as accurate in judging adequacy of control as use of urine steroid concentrations. of 34 evaluations, a definite assessment of adequacy of control could be arrived at 25 times using urinary values and 22 times using both serum dhea-s and 17-ohp concentrations. dhea-s concentration responded sluggishly when treatment was not adequate, being greater than 100 microgram/dl only in patients significantly undertreated. it was never elevated in well-controlled patients. mid-afternoon 17-ohp concentrations were less than 200 ng/dl in well-controlled patients but readily escaped suppression and could not be used to differentiate poor from borderline control or from temporary noncompliance. therefore, an increases dhea-s concentration indicated poor control and a suppressed 17-ohp concentration indicated good control. the combination of normal dhea-s level with elevated 17-ohp level, however, did not permit exact evaluation of the degree of control. of significance is that not all patients with cah present with an elevated dhea-s concentration, and only in those in whom an elevated level has been documented can dhea-s level be used as an index of control during therapy.

the growth hormone (gh) reserve of 15 short children was evaluated with the levodopa-propranolol test (dpt) and the sequential arginine-insulin test (ait). four patients failed to respond to both tests and were classified as hyposomatotropic. in the other 11 children, the mean gh peak response to the dpt was significantly higher than that to the ait, mainly because five subjects who had a normal response to the dpt failed to respond to the ait. these children had a generally poor yearly growth increment prior to testing associated in three with an obvious emotional problem, and were found at follow-up to have resumed a normal growth pattern. these data confirm the effectiveness of the dpt as a test of gh reserve. although hypoglycemia can occur occasionally during test, this procedure is safer and easier to perform than the widely used ait. finally, the dpt seems to detect a category of children who have a temporary growth failure and nonresponse to the usual gh tests but who are not hyposomatotropic and consequently do not require human gh.

the pathogenesis of fatal amniotic fluid infections was analyzed in a large prospective study that included more than 1,000 medical, demographic, hereditary, and postmortem variables. the disorder was the most frequent cause of death in the study, with an overall perinatal mortality of 6.17 per 1,000 births. the mortality progressively declined after mid-gestation when antimicrobial activity normally appears in the amniotic fluid. a second peak of the fatal infections, after 37 weeks' gestation, was found mainly in the poor and undernourished. maternal gestational weight gains were suboptimal and the involved neonates had a pattern of growth retardation characteristic of undernutrition. maternal pregnancy weight gains were positively correlated with the number of prenatal clinic visits. mother's race, socioeconomic status, age, short stature, and number of prior unsuccessful pregnancies lost their positive association with the fatal infections when mothers made more than nine clinic visits.

candida albicans meningitis was diagnosed in a 45-day-old premature infant whose birth weight was 1,616 gm. symptoms consisted of poor weight gain and poor suckling. the combined use of amphotericin b and 5-fluorocytosine (5-fc) resulted in negative csf cultures after 12 days of therapy. amphotericin b was given for 45 days (total 83 mg) and 5-fc for 60 days (total 19 mg). only one other premature infant has been reported in the literature who had similar treatment. a review of candida meningitis diagnosed before death in 11 other infants less than 1 year of age is presented.

a recently developed haemophilus influenzae type b capsular polysaccharide vaccine was given to 48,977 children 3 months to 5 years of age; an equal number of children receiving group a meningococcal vaccine served as controls. the protection as well as serum antibody response was strongly age-dependent. among children who had received the h. influenzae type b vaccine when 18 months of age or older, there were no cases of bacteremic disease caused by h. influenzae type b in the first year after vaccination. at the same time 11 such cases were seen in the control group of the same age, a highly significant difference. in the second year after vaccination two cases occurred in the h. influenzae type b-vaccinated group, five in the meningococcal-group a vaccinated group. no protection was seen among children who had been younger than 18 months when vaccinated, even if they received a booster dose of the vaccine. the serum antibody response to the h. influenzae type b polysaccharide, measured by radioimmunoassay, was poor in children below 18 months of age and good in those above it. no effect of the vaccine could be seen on the nasopharyngeal carriage of h. influenzae type b, which was approximately 6% in this age group. adverse effects of the vaccine were mild.

the relation between directly measured arterial blood pressure and blood volume was studied in 61 sick preterm infants. mean blood volume (derived from plasma volume [t1824 ten-minute albumin space] and hematocrit value) of 26 hypotensive infants (89.1 +/- 17.26 ml/kg) was not significantly different from that of 35 normotensive, but otherwise comparable, infants (91.4 +/- 14.57 ml/kg). there was no relation between arterial mean blood pressure and blood volume. twenty-one infants with arterial mean blood pressure less than 30 mm hg were given 1.0 g/kg of 10% salt-poor albumin. significant increases in blood pressure occurred but were small in magnitude; more than one half of infants had arterial mean blood pressures persistently less than 30 mm hg. arterial/alveolar po2 ratio decreased significantly with albumin infusion in six infants with hyaline membrane disease not receiving continuous distending-airway pressure, suggesting an association between infused albumin and impaired oxygen exchange.

a systematic, aggressive approach to the immunocompromised child with interstitial pneumonitis has been used in 24 consecutive patients. parent and physician awareness of early symptoms and signs had been emphasized. when laboratory data confirmed clinical suspicion, open lung biopsy was done and lung tissue was studied by impression smears, sections, and culture techniques. the etiologic agent was established by stained impression smears within three hours of receipt of tissue in 21 of 24 patients. eighteen of 24 patients survived. patients had a poor prognosis if they required ventilatory assistance (five of seven died) or had respiratory symptoms for three days or more prior to biopsy (four of 13 died). children with solid tumors who had absolute lymphocyte counts less than 500/cu mm, had received chemotherapy and radiotherapy to the chest, and had developed pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis had a poor outcome (all three died).

a mother and son had an autosomal-dominant malformation syndrome that included absence of the lacrimal puncta, obstruction of the nasolacrimal ducts, hearing loss, poor dentition, and abnormal thumbs. the son also had severe hypertension with renal anomalies and absence of several salivary glands. affected members of the only other reported family also had cup-shaped ears and synostosis of the radius and ulna. early recognition of this disorder is important because of the possibility that the affected infant may have hearing loss and kidney malformations.

three children with sleep apnea, alveolar hypoventilation, apparent mental retardation, and poor growth associated with chronically enlarged tonsils and adenoids were treated with the use of a nasopharyngeal tube followed by tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. the effectiveness of this therapy was documented by polygraphic recording of sleep stages and respirations, and by correlation with serial arterial blood gases and ph. the nasopharyngeal tube was well tolerated, easy to use, and effective in diagnosis and treatment. we suggest that its use be further evaluated in patients with obstructive apnea.

the congenital neutropenias are a heterogenous group of diseases whose etiology and pathogenesis are largely unknown. we studied nine neutropenic patients from seven families. evaluation included peripheral blood cell and differential cell counts, epinephrine and typhoid vaccine stimulation studies. rebuck skin windows, and bone marrow aspirations for morphological assessment and for in vitro culture in liquid suspension and in agar plates. parallel cultures were set up with and without colony-stimulating activity (csa), and peripheral leukocytes were assayed for cellular production of csa. patients were initially classified on the basis of their clinical course: benign, mild, moderately severe, or severe disease. one patient in the moderately severe group had an immunoglobulin disorder. morphologically normal mature granulocytes were seen in bone marrow aspirates of two patients, and maturational defects of varying degree were seen in the remaining seven. colony formation in agar was markedly reduced below normal in three of seven, moderately reduced in two of seven, and greater than normal in two patients. colonies in six of seven patients consisted exclusively of macrophages. marrow from all but one of the nine patients demonstrated poor neutrophil development in suspension culture, and addition of csa did not result in augmented granulocytic proliferation or maturation. a scheme of normal neutrophil maturation is proposed, and the nine patients were categorized according to this scheme. four patterns of congenital neutropenia emerged: type 1 was the most benign form of disease with essentially normal clinical and in vitro parameters, and a defect considered to be due to a small committed stem cell pool, abnormal release, or excessive utilization peripherally; type 2 had mild disease with presumed defective committed stem cell differentiation along the granulocyte line; type 3 included benign to severe clinical expression with an apparent defect at the level of the committed granulocyte precursor more severe than in type 2; type 4 disease had varied clinical expression but evidence for a defect at the level of the pluripotent stem cell.

two children had prepubertal xy gonadal dysgenesis. a 7-year-old girl with clitoral enlargement had a left ovarian tumor that contained a dysgerminoma; the right gonad proved to be a gonadoblastoma. the second child (a 2-year-old girl) showed poor physical development and slight virilization of the genitalia. her bilateral dysgenetic gonads were removed at exploratory laparotomy. the occurrence of gonadal tumors in xy gonadal dysgenesis is increased. it is probably related to the hypergonadotropinism existing from childhood as well as to genetic predisposition of the cryptorchid testis in the presence of a y chromosome. our first patient is one of the youngest who had xy gonadal dysgenesis iwth gonadoblastoma reported. the indication of prophylactic gonadectomy in xy gonadal dysgenesis is emphasized.

atrial fibrillation is rare in children. previous reports associated it with severe rheumatic heart disease and a poor prognosis. this review is of the unique experience of 35 cases of atrial fibrillation in children in the past 22 years; 23 patients were boys. the age of onset ranged from 1 day to 19 years (average, 8 years). associated cardiac conditions were severe rheumatic mitral regurgitation (3 cases), cardiomyopathy (5), atrial tumors (2), infective endocarditis (1), paroxysmal atrial tachycardia of infants (4), idiopathic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (1), marfan's syndrome with mitral regurgitation (1), endocardial fibroelastosis (1), and structural congenital heart malformations (17). surgical correction of congenital heart lesions was directly related to the development of atrial fibrillation in 14. varying arrhythmias of the sick-sinus syndrome were observed in five children. the atrial fibrillation was paroxysmal or transient in 21 patients and persistent in 14. treatment depended on the underlying condition. digoxin was used in all cases and cardioversion attempted in ten; no patient was given anticoagulants. three children had cerebral emboli, with residual defects. eighteen patients are known to be alive, 13 are dead, and 4 are lost to follow-up. atrial fibrillation in childhood is an indication for complete investigation of the patient and for the institution of treatment appropriate to the underlying disease.

cephalexin was compared to ampicillin for the treatment of otitis media in a randomized study. bacteriologic diagnosis was sought by needle tympanocentesis in 179 children. no overall statistically significant differences were noted between the two groups; however, 20 patients who received cephalexin had a poor response to therapy whereas only five recipients of ampicillin responded poorly. a significant difference (p less than .05) between the two regimens was noted when hemophilus influenzae was recovered. fifty per cent of the children with h. influenzae otitis media who were treated with cephalexin responded poorly; no patients receiving ampicillin had a poor response. our data suggest that the use of cephalexin monohydrate is not warranted for treatment of otitis media due to h. influenzae even when the isolate proves sensitive to this drug in vitro. in selected patients with otitis media caused by staphylococcus aureus which is resistant to penicillin, cephalexin may provide effective treatment.

during part of a national study to formulate criteria for chart audit of quality assurance of child health care, criteria were developed for diagnosis and management of urinary tract infections. these criteria were validated by pediatricians and family physicians in academic medicine and in practice. they were judged relevant to the medical care process and patient outcome by both. the selected criteria were also recommended by the majority of two large physician groups for use in peer review. an important aspect of the study assessed the frequency of performing and recording indicated procedures or tests. in the first three phases of the study these criteria were said to be performed and recorded by a large majority of physicians. however, in the fourth (community) phase, when charts of 166 primary care physicians were actually audited, documentation was so poor that peer review by chart audit would be impractical at present. assuming proper documentation of the medical care process, similar criteria could be used for chart audit, clinical research, and educational purposes. since the diagnostic and management process of initial urinary tract infection is established, development of structured health care forms and education in proper record-keeping are two important challenges for those interested in the evaluation of ambulatory care.

infant birthweight doubling time is widely quoted as being achieved between 5 and 6 months. the purpose of this study was to determine the time of birthweight doubling and to identify important related variables. a total of 357 normal infants with birthweights between 2,500 and 4,100 gm were studied. mean age of birthweight doubling for the entire group was 119 days (3.8 months). bottle-fed infants doubled their birthweights earlier than breast-fed infants: 113 days vs. 124 days (p less than .05). boys doubled their birthweights earlier than girls: 111 days vs. 129 days (p less than .0001). solids were introduced earlier in bottle-fed infants (mean , 1.9 months) than in breast-fed infants (mean, 3.9 months). harvard percentiles for mean group weight and length at the time of birthweight doubling were: for bottle-fed infants, 75th and 55th percentiles respectively: for breast-fed infants, 55th and 60th percentiles respectively; for boys, 75th percentile for both weight and length; for girls, 50th percentile for both weight and length. thus, bottle-fed infants appear to have weight gains in excess of length gain and may be developing early obesity. in light of the poor prognosis in treating obesity, closer supervision of early infant feeding practices is indicated.

plasma phytosterol (plant sterol) levels were studied in 26 infants on various commercial formulas, in 36 infants on breast or cow's milk formulas, in 101 normal and 22 hypercholesterolemic children on a free diet, and in 32 hypercholesterolemic children on a low-cholesterol diet. commercial formulas, poor in animal fats and enriched with vegetable oils, and low-cholesterol, phytosterol-rich diets generally elevated total plasma phytosterol levels in infants and hypercholesterolemic children from normal mean levels of 2 mg/100 ml to about 9 mg/100 ml. the implications of long-term three- to five-fold elevations of the plasma phytosterols (campesterol, stigmasterol, beta-sitosterol) in infancy and childhood are unknown. watchful prospective analysis of plasma phytosterol levels may be useful, particularly in regards to otherwise unanticipated long-term effects of cholesterol-poor, phytosterol rich diets.

the high prevalence of low-birthweight (less than or equal to 2,500 gm) babies in many poor communities is a major public health problem. studies in humans in situations of acute starvation suggest an effect of maternal nutrition on birthweight, but less clear results appear under situations of moderate maternal malnutrition. we studied the effects of food supplementation during pregnancy on birthweight in four rural villages of guatemala, in which two types of supplements were distributed: protein-caloric and caloric. the caloric supplementation increased the total caloric intake during pregnancy. in both supplements, the amount of calories supplemented during pregnancy showed a consistent association with birthweight. in the combined sample the proportion of low-birthweight babies in the high-supplement group (g greater than or equal to 20,000 supplemented calories during pregnancy) was 9% compared with 19% in the low-supplement group (less than 20,000 supplemented calories during pregnancy). the relationship between caloric supplementation and birthweight (29 gm of birthweight per 10,000 supplemented calories) was basically unchanged after controlling for the maternal home diet, height, head circumference, parity, gestational age, duration of disease during pregnancy, socioeconomic status, and different rates of missing data. moreover, a similar association was found in consecutive pregnancies of the same mother. we concluded that caloric supplementation during pregnancy produced the observed increase in birthweight.

serial plasma samples for corticoid determination were obtained during the neonatal period in 16 infants with rds (eight of whom died) and 44 healthy babies. the median corticoid level in the eight infants with rds who was considerably higher than that of patients with rds who survived, or the normal babies. the median corticoid level in the surviving rds infants was statistically greater than that of the normal controls, but the actual difference was only 1.9 mug/100 ml. simultaneous ph, pco2, po2, hco3- and corticoid measurements were obtained serially in five patients with fatal rds. however, the correlation between plasma corticoids and the acid-base determination was poor in all but one infant. it is concluded that infants are able to respond to severe physical stress in the neonatal period with an appropriate rise in plasma corticoid concentration, but lesser degrees of illness may cause only minimal changes in corticoid levels.

