preterm delivery and low birth weight (lbw) are generally associated with worse outcomes in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (hlhs), but an individual preterm or small neonate may do well. we sought to explore the interactions between gestational age, birth weight, and birth weight for gestational age with intermediate outcomes in hlhs. we analyzed survival, growth, neurodevelopment, length of stay, and complications to age 6 years in subjects with hlhs from the single ventricle reconstruction trial. univariate and multivariable survival and regression analyses examined the effects and interactions of lbw (<2500 g), weight for gestational age, and gestational age category. early-term delivery (n = 234) was more common than term (n = 219) delivery. small for gestational age (sga) was present in 41% of subjects, but only 14% had lbw. preterm, compared with term, delivery was associated with an increased risk of death or transplant at age 6 years (all: hazard ratio = 2.58, confidence interval = 1.43-4.67; norwood survivors: hazard ratio = 1.96, confidence interval = 1.10-3.49) independent of lbw and weight for gestational age. preterm delivery, early-term delivery, lbw, and sga were each associated with lower weight at 6 years. neurodevelopmental outcomes were worst in the lbw cohort. preterm delivery in hlhs was associated with worse survival, even beyond norwood hospitalization. lbw, sga, and early-term delivery were associated with worse growth but not survival. lbw was associated with worse neurodevelopment, despite similar length of stay and complications. these data suggest that preterm birth and lbw (although often concomitant) are not equivalent, impacting clinical outcomes through mechanisms independent of perioperative course complexity.

a 20-week-old fetus was diagnosed with critical pulmonary valve stenosis. given the ultrasound findings, the outcome was difficult to predict. the fetal cardiologists discussed the possibility of a pulmonary valvuloplasty (an experimental procedure) with the parents, wherein the fetal right ventricle would be punctured with a long 18g needle, and through it, a wire advanced across the pulmonary valve, allowing for balloon dilation of the valve. the experimental procedure had been performed at a handful of centers. there were some reports of success. the parents sought an opinion at one of the referral centers that had tried the procedure. the doctors there recommended against it. the doctors at the original center were unsure whether they should try the procedure. the parents wanted it. in this ethics rounds, doctors and the parents discuss the arguments for and against a high-risk, innovative in utero procedure.

mental health outcomes for survivors of critical congenital heart disease (chd) remain under-investigated. we sought to examine psychiatric disorders and psychosocial functioning in adolescents with single ventricle chd and to explore whether patient-related risk factors predict dysfunction. this cohort study recruited 156 adolescents with single ventricle chd who underwent the fontan procedure and 111 healthy referents. participants underwent comprehensive psychiatric evaluation including a clinician-rated psychiatric interview and parent- and self-report ratings of anxiety, disruptive behavior, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd), and depressive symptoms. risk factors for dysfunction included iq, medical characteristics, and concurrent brain abnormalities. adolescents with single ventricle chd had higher rates of lifetime psychiatric diagnosis compared with referents (chd: 65%, referent: 22%; p < .001). specifically, they had higher rates of lifetime anxiety disorder and adhd (p < .001 each). the chd group scored lower on the primary psychosocial functioning measure, the children's global assessment scale, than referents (chd median [interquartile range]: 62 [54-66], referent: 85 [73-90]; p < .001). the chd group scored worse on measures of anxiety, disruptive behavior, and depressive symptoms. genetic comorbidity did not impact most psychiatric outcomes. risk factors for anxiety disorder, adhd, and lower psychosocial functioning included lower birth weight, longer duration of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, lower intellectual functioning, and male gender. adolescents with single ventricle chd display a high risk of psychiatric morbidity, particularly anxiety disorders and adhd. early identification of psychiatric symptoms is critical to the management of patients with chd.

little is known about chronic neuromotor disability (cnd) including cerebral palsy and motor impairments after acquired brain injury in children surviving early complex cardiac surgery (ccs). we sought to determine the frequency and presentation of cnd in this population while exploring potentially modifiable acute care predictors. this prospective follow-up study included 549 children after ccs requiring cardiopulmonary bypass at ≤6 weeks of age. groups included those with only 1 ccs, mostly biventricular chd, and those with >1 ccs, predominantly single ventricle defects. at 4.5 years of age, 420 (94.6%) children received multidisciplinary assessment. frequency of cnd is given as percentage of assessed survivors. predictors of cnd were analyzed using multiple logistic regression analysis. cnd occurred in 6% (95% confidence interval [ci] 3.7%-8.2%) of 4.5-year survivors; for 1 ccs, 4.2% (ci 2.3%-6.1%) and >1, 9.8% (ci 7%-12.6%). cnd presentation showed: hemiparesis, 72%; spasticity, 80%; ambulation, 72%; intellectual disability, 44%; autism, 16%; epilepsy, 12%; permanent vision and hearing impairment, 12% and 8%, respectively. overall, 32% of presumed causative events happened before first ccs. independent odds ratio for cnd are age (days) at first ccs, 1.08 (ci 1.04-1.12; p < .001); highest plasma lactate before first ccs (mmol/l), 1.13 (ci 1.03-1.23; p = 0.008); and >1 ccs, 3.57 (ci 1.48-8.9; p = .005). cnd is not uncommon among ccs survivors. the frequency of associated disabilities characterized in this study informs pediatricians caring for this vulnerable population. shortening the waiting period and reducing preoperative plasma lactate levels at first ccs may assist in reducing the frequency of cnd.

we report a noteworthy case of a 7-month-old infant who suddenly and unexpectedly died during her sleep. after a complete postmortem examination, review of the clinical history, and detailed death scene investigation, the death remained unexplained, leading to a diagnosis of sudden infant death syndrome. however, an extensive review of the brainstem neuropathology revealed a severe alteration in the area postrema (a highly vascular structure lying at the base of the fourth ventricle outside of the blood-brain barrier). the alteration was likely due to massive and repeated to a common household insecticide in the last few weeks of life. these results provide an explanation for this sudden infant death, allowing a differential diagnosis from sudden infant death syndrome. 

this initiative sought to improve nutrition delivery in critically ill children with heart disease admitted to the cardiac icu (cicu) and neonates undergoing stage 1 palliation (s1p) for single-ventricle physiology through interdisciplinary team interventions. specific goals were increased caloric and protein delivery for all patients and a more nourished state for infants with single ventricles at the time of discharge. we developed a nutrition flow sheet in the electronic health record to track whether daily nutrition goals were met. interventions included nurses reporting daily whether caloric and protein goals were met, mandatory involvement of feeding specialists, and introduction of an enteral nutrition guideline. for infants undergoing s1p, weight-for-age z score (as an indicator for assessing malnutrition) was calculated at admission and discharge. the percentage of patient days per month when daily caloric goals were met increased from 50.1% to 60.7%, and protein goals met increased from 51.6% to 72.7%. hospital length of stay, need for ventilation, and mortality did not differ. patients undergoing s1p demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in weight-for-age z score compared with the preintervention group (p = .003). thirteen s1p patients were discharged undernourished in the preintervention group; 5 were severely undernourished. in the intervention group, 4 patients were discharged undernourished, and none were severely undernourished. this initiative resulted in improved nutrition delivery for a heterogeneous population of cardiac patients in the cicu as well as significant improvements in weight gain and nourishment status at discharge in infants undergoing s1p.

autism spectrum disorder (asd) is a common neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a complex interaction between genetic and environmental risk factors. among the environmental factors, vitamin d3 (cholecaliferol) seems to play a significant role in the etiology of asd because this vitamin is important for brain development. lower concentrations of vitamin d3 may lead to increased brain size, altered brain shape, and enlarged ventricles, which have been observed in patients with asd. vitamin d3 is converted into 25-hydroxyvitamin d3 in the liver. higher serum concentrations of this steroid may reduce the risk of autism. importantly, children with asd are at an increased risk of vitamin d deficiency, possibly due to environmental factors. it has also been suggested that vitamin d3 deficiency may cause asd symptoms. here, we report on a 32-month-old boy with asd and vitamin d3 deficiency. his core symptoms of autism improved significantly after vitamin d3 supplementation. this case suggests that vitamin d3 may play an important role in the etiology of asd, stressing the importance of clinical assessment of vitamin d3 deficiency and the need for vitamin d3 supplementation in case of deficiency. 

plastic bronchitis is a rare and often fatal complication of single-ventricle surgical palliation after total cavopulmonary connection. although lymphatic abnormalities have been postulated to play a role in the disease process, the etiology and pathophysiology of this complication remain incompletely understood. here we report on the etiology of plastic bronchitis in a child with total cavopulmonary connection as demonstrated by magnetic resonance (mr) lymphangiography. we also report on a new treatment of this disease. the patient underwent noncontrast t2-weighted mr lymphatic mapping and dynamic contrast mr lymphangiography with bi-inguinal intranodal contrast injection to determine the anatomy and flow pattern of lymph in his central lymphatic system. the mri scan demonstrated the presence of a dilated right-sided peribronchial lymphatic network supplied by retrograde lymphatic flow through a large collateral lymphatic vessel originating from the thoracic duct. after careful analysis of the mri scans we performed selective lymphatic embolization of the pathologic lymphatic network and supplying vessel. this provided resolution of plastic bronchitis for this patient. five months after the procedure, the patient remains asymptomatic off respiratory medications. 

to compare the accuracy of rapid cranial magnetic resonance imaging (mri) with that of computed tomography (ct) for diagnosing ventricular shunt malfunction. we performed a single-center, retrospective cohort study of children ≤21 years of age who underwent either rapid cranial mri or cranial ct in the emergency department (ed) for evaluation of possible ventricular shunt malfunction. each neuroimaging study was classified as "normal" (unchanged or decreased ventricle size) or "abnormal" (increased ventricle size). we classified a patient as having a ventricular shunt malfunction if operative revision for relief of mechanical causes of altered shunt flow was needed within 72 hours of initial ed evaluation. our primary analysis tested noninferiority of the accuracy of rapid cranial mri to ct for diagnosing shunt malfunction (noninferiority margin 10%). we included 698 ed visits for 286 unique patients, with a median age at visit of 10.0 years (interquartile range 5.9-15.5 years). patients underwent ct in 336 (48%) or rapid cranial mri in 362 (52%) of ed visits for evaluation of possible shunt malfunction. patients had operative revision for ventricular shunt malfunction in 140 ed visits (20%). the accuracy of rapid cranial mri was not inferior to that of ct scan for diagnosing ventricular shunt malfunction (81.8% mri vs 82.4% ct; risk difference 2.0%; 95% confidence interval, -4.2% to 8.2%). rapid cranial mri was not inferior to ct for diagnosing ventricular shunt malfunction and offers the advantage of sparing a child ionizing radiation exposure.

children with congenital heart disease (chd) are at risk for developmental delay (dd). changes in cognitive, language, and motor skills in early childhood have not been described. we report the results of a structured approach using longitudinal testing to identify problems and ensure early intervention in accordance with published guidelines. bayley scales of infant development, third edition, were used to assess cognitive, language, and motor skills in 99 children with chd. subjects were evaluated 3 to 6 times in the first 3 years of life. dd was defined as scores >1 sd below the population mean. cardiac anatomy was single ventricle (1v) in 34 subjects and 2 ventricles (2v) in 65. medical comorbidities were present in 21% and genetic syndromes in 19%. most subjects (75%) had dd in ≥1 area at ≥1 assessments. subjects with 1v anatomy had equivalent outcomes to those with 2v. cognitive and language scores declined in subjects with genetic syndromes but were stable and within the average range for subjects with 1v and 2v. motor scores improved for subjects with 1v and 2v but remained low for those with genetic syndromes. in addition to age, need for supplemental tube feeding, longer cardiopulmonary bypass time, and shorter time since last hospitalization were significant predictors of developmental outcomes. dds in young children with chd are both common and dynamic. providers should encourage longitudinal surveillance for children with chd because exposure to risk and prevalence of dd change over time.

restricted dietary intake is common among children with behavioral issues. here we report a case of a severely autistic child who presented initially with limp but who soon developed cough, tachypnea, hypoxia, and tachycardia. an echocardiogram revealed evidence of pulmonary hypertension (ph) with severely dilated right ventricle and elevated right-sided pressures. the etiology of his ph was unclear but further laboratory evaluation demonstrated severe nutritional deficiencies, in particular an undetectable ascorbic acid (vitamin c) level as well as deficient levels of thiamine (vitamin b1), pyridoxine (vitamin b6), cobalamin (vitamin b12), and vitamin d. repletion of these vitamins was associated with resolution of his ph and his musculoskeletal complaints. we report this case and a review of the relevant literature as a clinical lesson to expand the differential diagnosis of limp in children who may be difficult to assess as well as to report on an unusual association between severe vitamin deficiencies and ph. 

we sought to describe growth in young children with congenital heart disease (chd) over time. we performed a retrospective matched cohort study, identifying children with chd in a large primary care network in pennsylvania, new jersey, and delaware and matching them 10:1 with control subjects. the primary endpoint was the difference in mean world health organization z score for cases and controls for weight-for-age (wfaz), length-for-age (lfaz), weight-for-length (wflz), and head circumference-for-age (hcfaz) at traditional ages for preventive visits, stratified by chd category. we evaluated 856 cases: 37 with single ventricle (sv) physiology, 52 requiring complex repair (cr), 159 requiring simple repair (sr), and 608 requiring no repair. for children in the sv, cr, and sr categories, large, simultaneous, and statistically significant (student's t test p < .05) decreases in wfaz and lfaz appeared within the first month of life, peaked near 4 months, and persisted through 24 or 36 months. there were fewer and smaller decreases in the no-repair group between 2 and 18 months. hc data were available between 1 week and 24 months; at those ages, decreases in mean hcfaz generally paralleled decreases in wfaz and lfaz in the sv, cr, and sr groups. children with chd experience early, simultaneous decreases in growth trajectory across weight, length, and head circumference. the simultaneous decrease suggests a role for altered growth regulation in children with chd.

delayed cord clamping (dcc) has been advocated during preterm delivery to improve hemodynamic stability during the early neonatal period. the hemodynamic effects of dcc in premature infants after birth have not been previously examined. our objective was to compare the hemodynamic differences between premature infants randomized to either dcc or immediate cord clamping (icc). this prospective study was conducted on a subset of infants who were enrolled in a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effects of dcc versus icc. entry criteria included gestational ages of 24(0) to 31(6) weeks. twins and infants of mothers with substance abuse were excluded. serial doppler studies were performed at 6 ± 2, 24 ± 4, 48 ± 6, and 108 ± 12 hours of life. measurements included superior vena cava blood flow, right ventricle output, middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity (bfv), superior mesenteric artery bfv, left ventricle shortening fraction, and presence of a persistent ductus arteriosus. twenty-five infants were enrolled in the dcc group and 26 in the icc group. gestational age, birth weight, and male gender were similar. admission laboratory and clinical events were also similar. dcc resulted in significantly higher superior vena cava blood flow over the study period, as well as greater right ventricle output and right ventricular stroke volumes at 48 hours. no differences were noted in middle cerebral artery bfv, mean superior mesenteric artery bfv, shortening fraction, or the incidence of a persistent ductus arteriosus. dcc in premature infants is associated with potentially beneficial hemodynamic changes over the first days of life.

a previously healthy 10-month-old boy was referred to our hospital because of coarse facial features that were suggestive of lysosomal storage disease. apart from noisy respiration, there was no medical history. elevated levels of urinary glycosaminoglycans and complete deficiency of leukocyte α-l-iduronidase indicated severe mucopolysaccharidosis type i. a chest radiograph revealed a markedly enlarged heart, and echocardiography revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. while hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was being planned, progressive cardiac failure developed with a striking hypokinesia of the left-ventricle free wall. in combination with ischemic changes on the electrocardiogram, this was suggestive of coronary artery disease. results of coronary echo doppler interrogation were inconclusive, and intravascular ultrasound in this little infant was not feasible. despite the patient's small size, a successful selective coronary angiography was performed and revealed diffuse narrowing of the left coronary artery with collateral flow from the right coronary artery. enzyme-replacement therapy was started immediately in an attempt to improve myocardial performance. evaluation after 3 months, however, revealed complete obliteration of the left coronary main stem with diffuse hypokinesia/akinesia of the left ventricle. at the age of 13 months the boy died of terminal cardiac failure. this case report illustrates the importance of considering early development of coronary artery disease in children with severe mucopolysaccharidosis type i and cardiomyopathy.

to characterize serious congenital heart disease in very low birth weight (vlbw) infants (born at <1500 g or a gestational age of 22-29 weeks) in a large, international database. we analyzed a database of 99 786 vlbw infants born or treated at 703 nicus between calendar years 2006 and 2007. we defined serious congenital heart disease as 1 of 14 specific lesions or any other structural congenital heart disease that required surgical or medical treatment by initial hospital discharge or by the age of 1 year. we reviewed records for all infants with cardiac diagnoses and other genetic syndromes and associations to determine which had serious congenital heart disease. we excluded nonstructural disease as well as isolated and untreated atrial or ventricular septal defects. we determined the frequency of serious congenital heart disease, compared overall mortality rates of those with and without serious congenital heart disease, and determined the distribution of specific lesions and mortality for each diagnosis. of 99 786 vlbw infants studied, 893 had serious congenital heart disease (8.9 per 1000). the most common lesions were tetralogy of fallot (n = 166 [18.6% of those with serious congenital heart disease]), aortic coarctation (n = 103 [11.5%]), complete atrioventricular canal (n = 81 [9.1%]), pulmonary atresia (n = 73 [8.2%]), and double-outlet right ventricle (n = 68 [7.6%]). the mortality rate of those with serious congenital heart disease was 44%, compared with 12.7% in those without serious congenital heart disease (p < .0001). serious congenital heart disease is probably more frequent in vlbw infants treated in nicus than in the general live-born population, and the distribution reflects lesions associated with extracardiac malformations. vlbw infants with serious congenital heart disease have higher a mortality rate than those without, independent of other risk factors.

prenatal intervention for fetuses with pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum (pa/ivs) has the potential to alter right heart physiologic features in utero, facilitating right heart growth and improving the prospect of a biventricular outcome after birth. since 2002, we have considered prenatal intervention for fetal pa/ivs in patients with (1) membranous pulmonary atresia, with identifiable pulmonary valve (pv) leaflets or membrane; (2) an intact or highly restrictive ventricular septum; and (3) right heart hypoplasia, with a tricuspid valve annulus z score of -2 or below and an identifiable but small right ventricle. intervention was performed through direct cardiac puncture under ultrasound guidance, with percutaneous access or access through a limited laparotomy. ten fetuses underwent attempted balloon dilation of the pv in utero. the first 4 procedures were technically unsuccessful, and the most-recent 6 were technically successful. compared with control fetuses with pa/ivs who did not undergo prenatal intervention and had univentricular outcomes after birth, the tricuspid valve annulus, right ventricle length, and pv annulus grew significantly more from midgestation to late gestation in the 6 fetuses who underwent successful interventions. in utero perforation and dilation of the pv in midgestation fetuses with pa/ivs is technically feasible and may be associated with improved right heart growth and postnatal outcomes for fetuses with moderate right heart hypoplasia in midgestation. there is an important learning curve for this procedure, and much remains to be learned about the selection of appropriate fetuses for prenatal intervention.

abnormalities in cognitive function and brain structure have been reported in acutely ill adolescents with anorexia nervosa, but whether these abnormalities persist or are reversible in the context of weight restoration remains unclear. brain structure and cognitive function in female subjects with adolescent-onset anorexia nervosa assessed at long-term follow-up were studied in comparison with healthy female subjects, and associations with clinical outcome were investigated. sixty-six female subjects (aged 21.3 +/- 2.3 years) who had a diagnosis of adolescent-onset anorexia nervosa and treated 6.5 +/- 1.7 years earlier in a tertiary care hospital and 42 healthy female control subjects (aged 20.7 +/- 2.5 years) were assessed. all participants underwent a clinical examination, magnetic resonance brain scan, and cognitive evaluation. clinical data were analyzed first as a function of weight recovery (n = 14, <85% ideal body weight; n = 52, >or=85% ideal body weight) and as a function of menstrual status (n = 18, absent/irregular menses; n = 29, oral contraceptive pill; n = 19, regular menses). group comparisons were made across structural brain volumes and cognitive scores. compared with control subjects, participants with anorexia nervosa who remained at low weight had larger lateral ventricles. twenty-four-hour urinary free-cortisol levels were positively correlated with volumes of the temporal horns of the lateral ventricles and negatively correlated with volumes of the hippocampi in clinical participants. participants who were amenorrheic or had irregular menses showed significant cognitive deficits across a broad range of many domains. female subjects with adolescent-onset anorexia nervosa showed abnormal cognitive function and brain structure compared with healthy individuals despite an extended period since diagnosis. to our knowledge, this is the first study to report a specific relationship between menstrual function and cognitive function in this patient population. possible mechanisms underlying neural and cognitive deficits with anorexia nervosa are discussed. additional examination of the effects of estrogen on cognitive function in female subjects with anorexia nervosa is necessary.

hydrocephalus is a serious complication of intraventricular hemorrhage in preterm infants, with adverse consequences from permanent ventriculoperitoneal shunt dependence. the development of hydrocephalus takes several weeks, but no clinical intervention has been shown to reduce shunt surgery in such infants. the aim of this study was to test a new treatment intended to prevent hydrocephalus and shunt dependence after intraventricular hemorrhage. we randomly assigned 70 preterm infants who had gestational ages of 24 to 34 weeks and were progressively enlarging their cerebral ventricles after intraventricular hemorrhage to either (1) drainage, irrigation, and fibrinolytic therapy to wash out blood and cytokines or (2) tapping of cerebrospinal fluid by reservoir as required to control excessive expansion and signs of pressure (standard treatment). we evaluated outcomes at 6 months of age or hospital discharge (if later). of 34 infants who were assigned to drainage, irrigation, and fibrinolytic therapy, 2 died and 13 underwent shunt surgery (dead or shunt: 44%). of 36 infants who were assigned to standard therapy, 5 died and 14 underwent shunt surgery (dead or shunt: 50%). this difference was not significant. twelve (35%) of 34 infants who received drainage, irrigation, and fibrinolytic therapy had secondary intraventricular hemorrhage compared with 3 (8%) of 36 in the standard group. secondary intraventricular hemorrhage was associated with an increased risk for subsequent shunt surgery and more blood transfusions. despite its logical basis and encouraging pilot data, drainage, irrigation, and fibrinolytic therapy did not reduce shunt surgery or death when tested in a multicenter, randomized trial. secondary intraventricular hemorrhage is a major factor that counteracts any possible therapeutic effect from washing out old blood.

an extra x chromosome in males (xxy), known as klinefelter syndrome, is associated with characteristic physical, cognitive, and behavioral features of variable severity. the objective of this study was to examine possible neuroanatomical substrates of these cognitive and behavioral features during childhood and adolescence. mri brain scans were acquired for 42 xxy and 87 healthy xy age-matched control males. we compared these 2 groups on regional brain volumes and cortical thickness. total cerebral volume and all lobar volumes except parietal white matter were significantly smaller in the xxy group, whereas lateral-ventricle volume was larger. consistent with the cognitive profile, the cortex was significantly thinner in the xxy group in left inferior frontal, temporal, and superior motor regions. the brain-imaging findings of preferentially affected frontal, temporal, and motor regions and relative sparing of parietal regions are consistent with observed cognitive and behavioral strengths and weaknesses in xxy subjects.

we investigated whether the combination of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and an angiotensin ii type 1 receptor antagonist offers better control of proteinuria and cardiovascular parameters without causing adverse side effects. we enrolled 10 children (mean age: 12.3 +/- 4.06 years) with proteinuria resulting from chronic renal diseases of various causes. the study consisted of 2 phases, 3 months each, for an overall 6-month observation time. during phase 1 (3 months), each child was assigned randomly to treatment with either an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin ii type 1 receptor antagonist alone. during phase 2, each child was advanced to combination therapy with the addition of an angiotensin ii type 1 receptor antagonist or an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, respectively. renal function tests, echocardiography, and 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring were performed at the beginning of the study (time 0), at 3 months (time 1), and at 6 months (time 2). at time 2, proteinuria (change: -80.21 +/- 10.75%), interventricular septum index (change: -13.63 +/- 18.64%), posterior wall of the left ventricle index (change: -30.71 +/- 20.32%), and left ventricular mass index (change: -28.33 +/- 24.44%) were reduced significantly, compared with time 0 and time 1. no untoward side effects were detected during the study. in the short term, the combination of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin ii type 1 receptor antagonists for children with proteinuria of renal origin reduced proteinuria significantly, compared with baseline or either drug alone. furthermore, echocardiographic studies gave evidence of reduction of left ventricular hypertrophy. additional studies are needed to evaluate long-term results.

here we report a familial cluster of 3 cases of coxsackievirus b3 infection: a recent history of illness in a woman's 3-year-old son with a coxsackievirus b3-positive stool culture indicated that he probably infected his mother at home during her last week of pregnancy. consequently, she delivered an infected neonate who developed severe hepatitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and bilateral intracranial hemorrhage. the neonate remained well for the first 2 days of life. on the third day, he developed fever (39 degrees c) and poor peripheral circulation. on the fourth day, he developed petechiae and bruises over his chest wall and extremities, and prolonged bleeding was observed over venipuncture sites. investigations revealed severe thrombocytopenia (platelets: 41 x 10(9)/l) and a markedly deranged coagulation profile (prothrombin time: 19 seconds [reference: < 10 seconds]; activated partial thromboplastin time: > 120 seconds [reference: 24.2-37.0 seconds], serum d-dimers: 6722 ng/ml [reference: < 500 ng/ml]), suggestive of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. clinical examination revealed yellow sclera, hepatomegaly (5 cm), and splenomegaly (2 cm), consistent with hepatitis. serial chest radiographs showed bilateral pleural effusions, and an ultrasound of the abdomen demonstrated ascites. an echocardiogram showed normal cardiac structure and good contractility of both ventricles. however, a cranial ultrasound revealed bilateral grade 2 intraventricular hemorrhages. serum c-reactive protein increased to 33.9 mg/l. liver-function tests were also markedly deranged at this time, with maximum values for serum alanine transferase, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and ammonia concentration of 1354 iu/l, 258 micromol/l, 189 iu/l, and 147 micromol/l, respectively. serum glucose levels were normal. over the next 3 days, his fever subsided, and his liver function and clotting profile normalized by day 13 after onset of illness. a stool sample from the older brother, collected 14 days after his onset of illness at home, was positive for coxsackievirus b3 by both virus culture and enterovirus reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. he had neutralizing coxsackievirus b3 antibody titers of 1:2560 and 1:1280 on days 14 and 28 after his onset of illness, respectively. no virus was cultured from the mother's stool sample, collected 5 days after her onset of illness, but the enterovirus polymerase chain reaction was positive and maternal sera neutralized the coxsackievirus b3 isolated from the neonate. the maternal sera also showed a more than fourfold rise in antibody titer from 1:80 to 1:640 on days 5 and 16 after her onset of illness, respectively. neonatal antibody titers also showed a more than fourfold rise from < 1:80 to 1:2560 on days 1 and 21 after his onset of illness, respectively. this demonstrates that both the mother and the neonate had had recent coxsackievirus b3 infections. serially collected neonatal throat swab and stool samples were culture negative for enterovirus by 4 and 8 days after his onset of illness, respectively. however, enterovirus rna remained detectable by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction in these samples for considerably longer, only becoming undetectable by 16, 23, and 41 days after his onset of illness. we show that even mild household infections may have potentially serious consequences for pregnant women and their infants.

pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum is a complex congenital cardiovascular anomaly that frequently requires single ventricle palliation. fetal diagnosis of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum is common, but the natural history of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum diagnosed in midgestation, predictors of neonatal anatomy, and predictors of biventricular repair have not been determined. the objective of this study was to determine whether the size and rate of growth of the fetal tricuspid valve predict neonatal anatomy and biventricular repair. twenty-three fetuses diagnosed with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum between 1990 and 2004 were studied. of 13 fetuses with a midgestation fetal tricuspid valve z score < or = -3, 1 achieved biventricular repair, compared with 5 of 5 with a tricuspid valve z score > -3. of 13 fetuses with a midgestation fetal tricuspid valve z score < or = -3, 8 were diagnosed postnatally with a right ventricular dependent coronary circulation, compared with none with a tricuspid valve z score > -3. midgestation and late gestation fetal tricuspid valve z scores correlated with neonatal tricuspid valve z score. the average rate of tricuspid valve growth between mid- and late fetal echocardiograms was significantly lower in patients who did not achieve biventricular repair than in those who did (0.012 +/- 0.008 cm per week vs 0.028 +/- 0.014 cm per week). fetal tricuspid valve z score and rate of growth predict postnatal outcome in pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. these findings may have important implications for prenatal counseling and selection of patients for fetal pulmonary valve dilation.

our goal was to determine whether the third ventricle is significantly enlarged among neonates with trisomy 21, compared with infants without clinical signs of trisomy 21. this enlargement might be related to hypoplasia of the structures surrounding the third ventricle. these structures participate in cognitive development, and hypoplasia in this area may be responsible for some of the unique cognitive abnormalities observed among children with trisomy 21. measurements of routine head sonographic scans of 57 term infants with trisomy 21 who were born between january 2000 and august 2005 were performed within 7 days after birth and were compared with measurements of head sonographic scans of 21 randomly selected, healthy, term infants without trisomy 21. although the 2 groups were of similar gestational ages, infants with trisomy 21 were generally smaller, with smaller head circumferences. despite the smaller overall head circumference, both the width and length of the third ventricle were enlarged among the infants with trisomy 21. vertical measurements of the lateral ventricles were similar for the 2 groups. the third ventricle is an important diencephalic space. in our neonatal population, we did show significant enlargement of both the length and width of the third ventricle among the infants with trisomy 21, compared with the control group of unaffected newborns. we suspect that the unique neuropsychological development and cognitive dysfunction associated with trisomy 21 and the enlargement of the third ventricle in the neonatal period might be related.

preterm birth and cardiovascular malformations are the 2 most common causes of neonatal and infant death, but there are no published population-based reports on the relationship between them. we undertook this study to determine the prevalence and spectrum of cardiovascular malformations in a preterm population, the prevalence of prematurity among infants with cardiovascular malformations, and the influence of prematurity and cardiovascular malformations on outcomes. we based the study on the population of the former northern health region of england. we identified all live-born infants with cardiovascular malformations diagnosed in the first 1 year of life from the regional pediatric cardiology database, which includes the gestational age and details of the diagnosis. we limited ascertainment to malformations diagnosed by the age of 12 months. infants with isolated patent ductus arteriosus or atrial septal defect were excluded, to avoid ascertainment bias. infants with ventricular septal defect were classified according to whether they required surgery in the first 1 year. there are no population data on gestational ages for all births in our population for the era of this study; therefore, we used data published in the literature for populations similar to our own to predict that 0.4% of live births occur at <28 weeks of gestation, 0.9% at 28 to 31 weeks, and 6% at 32 to 36 weeks. overall, 7.3% of live-born infants are preterm. of 521619 live-born infants in 1987-2001, 2964 had cardiovascular malformations (prevalence: 5.7 cases per 1000 live births). cardiovascular malformations were present at 5.1 cases per 1000 term infants and 12.5 cases per 1000 preterm infants. the odds ratio (or) for a cardiovascular malformation in prematurity was 2.4 (95% confidence interval [ci]: 2.2-2.7). we found that 474 infants (16%) with cardiovascular malformations were born at <37 weeks of gestation, giving an or for prematurity among infants with a cardiovascular malformation of 2.4 (95% ci: 2.2-2.7). more infants were born preterm with diagnoses of pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (23%), complete atrioventricular septal defect (22%), and coarctation of the aorta, tetralogy of fallot, and pulmonary valve stenosis (each 20%). fewer were born preterm with diagnoses of pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum (7%), transposition of the great arteries (8%), and single ventricle (9%). we found that 18% of infants with ventricular septal defect requiring surgery were preterm, compared with 13% in the nonsurgical group. preterm infants with ventricular septal defect required surgery in 30% of cases, compared with 23% of term infants with ventricular septal defect. these figures show that the excess of cardiovascular malformations among preterm infants cannot be explained by greater ascertainment of minor ventricular septal defects. in our denominator population, 646 live-born infants were recognized as having trisomy 21, and gestational age data were available for 609. of these, 149 (25%; 95% ci: 21-28%) were preterm. approximately two thirds of infants with complete atrioventricular septal defect have trisomy 21. complete atrioventricular septal defect was no more common among preterm infants with trisomy 21 (16%) than among term infants with trisomy 21. however, the increased incidence of prematurity among infants with trisomy 21 probably explains some of the excess of preterm births among infants with complete atrioventricular septal defect. only 4 (11%) of 38 infants with 22q11 deletion were born preterm. none of those infants had pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect; therefore, 22q11 deletion does not explain the excess of preterm births in pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect. the or for death in the first 1 year in the presence of a cardiovascular malformation was 4.4 (95% ci: 3.1-5.5) overall; ors were 1.8 at <28 weeks of gestation, 3.7 at 28 to 31 weeks, 11.0 at 32 to 36 weeks, and 35.6 at term. this study showed that preterm infants have more than twice as many cardiovascular malformations as do infants born at term and that 16% of all infants with cardiovascular malformations are preterm. it also showed, not surprisingly, that there is an increased mortality rate among infants born preterm with a cardiovascular malformation. the additional effect of cardiovascular malformations on mortality rates is most marked for term and near-term infants, for whom mortality rates are otherwise low. the excess of cardiovascular malformations among preterm infants is intriguing but not easy to explain. previous studies of birth weight among infants with cardiovascular malformations reported a significant increase in the likelihood of being small for gestational age among infants with tetralogy of fallot, complete atrioventricular septal defect, hypoplastic left heart, or large ventricular septal defect. there is an obvious relationship between birth weight and gestational age, and those studies also showed an increased prevalence of prematurity among infants with tetralogy of fallot, pulmonary stenosis, aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, complete atrioventricular septal defect, or ventricular septal defect. there is also a high prevalence of cardiovascular malformations among late stillbirths, with major differences in the number and spectrum of cardiovascular malformations, compared with those seen in postnatal life. in particular, there is a greater incidence of coarctation of the aorta, double-inlet left ventricle, hypoplastic left heart, truncus arteriosus, double-outlet right ventricle, and atrioventricular septal defect among stillbirths. this spectrum of malformations is similar to that in our study and to those in other reports. whether the increased prevalence of cardiovascular malformations among preterm infants and the increase in stillbirths suggest clues to the cause is difficult to say. the influence of preterm birth should be taken into account in risk assessment and risk stratification for surgical repair.

the diagnosis of persistent pulmonary hypertension (pphn) can often be difficult to make, especially in a clinical setting in which pediatric echocardiography is not readily available. a noninvasive test that could differentiate pphn from other cardiorespiratory disease would be very useful in the early management of the disease, because it would allow rapid identification of those infants at greatest risk of requiring the services of a level 3 nursery. brain-type natriuretic peptide (bnp) is an endogenous peptide hormone secreted by the cardiac ventricles in response to increased wall stress and related ventricular filling pressures. the purpose of this study was to determine if bnp levels are elevated in newborns with pphn and therefore may be used as a marker for differentiating pphn from other forms of respiratory disease during the early newborn period. we used a prospective cohort design with 3 groups. one group was diagnosed with pphn by clinical and echocardiographic criteria (pphn group: n = 15). the second group had been diagnosed with respiratory disease; however, pphn had been ruled out by having no evidence of elevated pulmonary pressure by echocardiography (rd group: n = 17). the third group had no respiratory disease and was breathing room air (ra group: n = 15). bnp levels were measured with a point-of-care fluorescence immunoassay at various time intervals between birth and 150 hours of life. there were no differences between groups for birth weight, gestational age, gender, race, apgar scores at 1 minute, or age at time of initial blood sampling. initial bnp levels (pg/ml) were elevated in the pphn group relative to both the ra and rd groups (median [25%, 75%]: pphn group = 1610 [1128, 1745]; rd group = 132 [76, 327]; ra group = 248 [127, 395]). there was no difference in the initial bnp level between the ra and rd groups. bnp levels remained elevated in the pphn group over both groups for the first 4 days of life. bnp levels correlated with the gradient of the tricuspid regurgitation jet and with the ratio of tricuspid regurgitation jet gradient to mean blood pressure. bnp levels were not affected by administration of dopamine or dobutamine. bnp weakly correlated with the oxygenation index but not with the alveolar-arterial oxygenation gradient. our findings indicate that bnp levels are elevated in infants with pphn but not in infants with other forms of respiratory distress not associated with pphn. elevated bnp levels in term or near-term infants with respiratory distress should increase the suspicion of pphn. serial determination may also be helpful in monitoring the clinical course of such infants.

left ventricular outflow tract obstructive (lvoto) malformations are a leading cause of infant mortality from birth defects. genetic mechanisms are likely, and there may be a higher rate of asymptomatic lvoto anomalies in relatives of affected children. this study sought to define the incidence of cardiac anomalies in first-degree relatives of children with congenital aortic valve stenosis (avs), coarctation of the aorta (coa), and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (hlhs). a total of 113 probands with a nonsyndromic lvoto malformation of avs (n = 25), bav (n = 3), coa (n = 52), hlhs (n = 30), and aortic hypoplasia with mitral valve atresia (n = 2) were ascertained through chart review or enrolled at the time of diagnosis. echocardiography was performed on 282 asymptomatic first-degree relatives. four studies had poor acoustic windows, leaving 278 studies for analysis. bav were found in 13 (4.68%) first-degree relatives. the relative risk of bav in the relatives was 5.05 (95% confidence interval: 2.2-11.7), and the broad sense heritability was 0.49, based on a general population frequency of 0.9%. bav was more common in multiplex families compared with sporadic cases. an additional 32 relatives had anomalies of the aorta, aortic valve, left ventricle, or mitral valve. the presence of an lvoto lesion greatly increases the risk of identifying bav in a parent or sibling, providing additional support for a complex genetic cause. the parents and siblings of affected patients should be screened by echocardiography as the presence of an asymptomatic bav may carry a significant long-term health risk.

this report describes a new etiology of pediatric syncope. epilepsy, brain anomalies, infection, electrolyte abnormalities, and trauma are commonly identified etiologies of seizures in the pediatric population. we report here a child with third-degree heart block and right ventricular outflow tract obstruction related to an intracardiac tumor presenting with syncope and seizure-like activity. echocardiography revealed a large (3 x 8-cm) intracardiac mass filling the right atrium, extending across the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle and crossing the atrial septum into the left atrium, extending into the left ventricular outflow tract. she underwent emergent cardiopulmonary bypass with removal of the majority of the tumor mass, clearing both the left and right ventricular outflow tracts of obstruction and repairing the tricuspid valve. postoperative cardiac conduction remained blocked and required permanent pacing. the initial serum alpha-fetoprotein level was grossly elevated, and the tumor showed characteristic histopathologic features of a yolk sac tumor. four years after the completion of her chemotherapy, she remains clinically well, with no evidence of recurrent tumor by echocardiography or radiographic studies, and her alpha-fetoprotein remains in the normal range. the clinical manifestations of tumor infiltration of the heart with complete heart block resulting in loss of consciousness with tonic-clonic movements are detailed. although rare, cardiac syncope has multiple known causes and should be suspected in any patient with sudden loss of consciousness and pallor. in the pediatric population, cardiac rhythm disturbances are typically the result, rather than the cause, of acute cardiac emergencies. pediatricians should be aware of depressed cardiac output and dysrhythmias as etiologies of new-onset syncope. evaluation should include a cardiac assessment with electrocardiogram to exclude a life-threatening arrhythmia as a potential cause.

to determine the prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy (lvh) in a multiethnic group of children and adolescents with hypertension. pooled data from 1998 to 2001 from 3 sites belonging to the international pediatric hypertension association were reviewed. patients undergoing echocardiography to detect lvh as part of the evaluation for hypertension were included for analysis. left ventricular mass was calculated from 2-dimensional guided m-mode echocardiographic measurements of the left ventricle. left ventricular mass index (lvmi) was calculated as left ventricular mass/height(2.7). lvh by adult criteria was defined as lvmi > 51 g/m(2.7) and by pediatric criteria as lvmi > 38.6 g/m(2.7). left ventricle geometry was classified as concentric, concentric remodeling, eccentric, or normal. data on 129 patients with a mean age of 13.6 +/- 3.6 years were analyzed. the population was 67% male, 46.5% white, 38.0% african american, and 15.5% hispanic. the prevalence of lvh was 15.5% using adult criteria and 41.1% using pediatric criteria. increasing body mass index (bmi) was associated with a higher lvmi. using either pediatric or adult criteria lvh was associated with bmi > or =95th percentile for age and gender. lvh and concentric hypertrophy were identified most frequently in hispanic children. lvh occurs commonly in children with hypertension and is associated with an increased bmi. lvh may be more prevalent in hispanic children than in other ethnic groups. prevention and treatment of obesity is important in reducing the cardiovascular risk for children with hypertension. further evaluation of the frequency of lvh in multiethnic populations is needed.

to compare regional brain volumes measured in term and preterm infants, and to correlate regional volumes with measures of neurodevelopmental outcome. high-contrast, high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging scans were acquired in 10 preterm and 14 term infants who were scanned near term. the cerebrum was segmented into cortical gray matter, white matter, cerebral ventricles, subcortical gray matter, cerebellum, and brainstem. the cortical gray matter, white matter, and ventricles were further divided into specific anatomic subregions, and the volumes were compared across groups. measures of cognitive and motor development were acquired between 18 and 20 months of corrected age. correlations of regional brain volumes with developmental outcome were assessed in the preterm group. volumes in preterm infants were reduced in parieto-occipital gray matter and increased in the midbody, occipital horn, and temporal horns of the lateral ventricles. gray matter volumes were also less prominently reduced in the sensorimotor and inferior occipital cortices. normal lateralization of white matter volumes were altered in the parieto-occipital region in the preterm infants, who had significantly larger left-sided and smaller right-sided structures. white matter volumes in the sensorimotor and midtemporal regions correlated strongly with measures of neurodevelopmental outcome. these findings of reduced volumes in sensorimotor and parieto-occipital regions in preterm infants, and the prospective correlations of regional volumes with cognitive outcome, confirm and extend findings previously reported in a cross-sectional study of 8-year-old prematurely born children. the data suggest that regional brain volumes near term are a promising marker for predicting disturbances of cognitive outcome in preterm infants. further prospective, longitudinal studies of neonatal brain volumes and developmental indices into later childhood are required to confirm the utility of regional brain volumes as predictors of longer term outcome.

treatment of posthemorrhagic ventricular dilation in premature infants is fraught with failures and complications. we have piloted a new treatment aimed at removing intraventricular blood and the cytokines associated with hydrocephalus. twenty-four infants were enrolled with ventricular width enlarged to 4 mm over the 97th centile after a large intraventricular hemorrhage. sixteen had parenchymal brain lesions before treatment. median gestation was 28 weeks, and birth weight was 1150 g. at a median postnatal age of 17 days, 2 ventricular catheters (1 right frontal, 1 left occipital) were inserted with 13 infants also having a reservoir frontally. tissue plasminogen activator 0.5 mg/kg was given intraventricularly 8 hours before the ventricles were irrigated with artificial cerebrospinal fluid at 20 ml/h for a median of 72 hours. seventeen of 23 survivors (74%) did not require a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. one infant (of 23 weeks' gestation) died. two infants developed reservoir-associated infection, and 2 infants had a second intraventricular hemorrhage. of the 19 survivors aged >12 months postterm, 8 were normal, 7 (37%) had single disability, and 4 (21%) had multiple disabilities. shunt surgery was reduced compared with historical controls with similar treatment criteria. mortality and single and multiple disability rates all showed downward trends. reducing pressure, free iron, and proinflammatory and profibrotic cytokines may reduce periventricular brain damage and permanent hydrocephalus. additional advances will require a controlled trial and better knowledge of the mechanisms of hydrocephalus.

recurrent hypoxemia has been proposed as an important pathophysiological mechanism underlying sudden infant death syndrome (sids). however, conflicting results emerged when xanthines were used as markers for hypoxia. the vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) gene is highly sensitive to changes in tissue partial oxygen tension, and changes in genomic and protein expression occur even after changes in oxygenation within the physiologic range. for determining whether hypoxia precedes sids, vegf levels were measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in the cerebrospinal fluid (csf) of 51 sids infants and in 33 additional control infants who died of an identifiable cause. in addition, 6 rats that had a chronically implanted catheter in the lateral ventricle were exposed to a short hypoxic challenge, and vegf concentrations were measured in csf at various time points for 24 hours. another set of 6 rats were killed with a pentobarbital overdose, and vegf csf levels were obtained at different time points after death. mean vegf concentrations in csf were 308.2 +/- 299.1 pg/dl in the sids group and 85.1 +/- 82.9 pg/dl in those who died of known causes. mean postmortem delay averaged 22 hours for both groups. in rat experiments, hypoxic exposures induced time-dependent increases in vegf, peaking at 12 hours and returning to baseline at 24 hours. postmortem duration in the animals was associated with gradual increases in vegf that reached significance only at 36 hours. we conclude that vegf csf concentrations are significantly higher in infants who die of sids. we postulate that hypoxia is a frequent event that precedes the sudden and unexpected death of these infants.

to determine the association between carotid artery intimal-medial thickness (cimt) and left ventricular mass index (lvmi) in children with elevated blood pressure. study subjects (n = 32; mean age: 13.9 +/- 2.7 years) were untreated new referrals to a pediatric hypertension clinic with confirmed elevated blood pressure. lvm was calculated from 2-dimensionally guided m-mode echocardiographic measurements of the left ventricle. lvmi was calculated as lvm (g)/height (m)2.7, and left ventricular hypertrophy (lvh) was defined as lvmi >95th percentile. carotid artery duplex ultrasound was performed by protocol by experienced vascular sonographers who were unaware of the echocardiography results. the thickest imt complex of the far wall of the distal common carotid artery was measured in longitudinal b-mode section using a high-resolution linear array of 8 mhz. the prevalence of lvh and increased cimt was 41% and 28%, respectively. subjects with increased cimt had higher lvmi (46.8 g/m2.7 vs 31.4 g/m2.7) than those with normal cimt. the lvh prevalence was 89% (8 of 9) among subjects with increased cimt as compared with 22% (5 of 23) in subjects with normal cimt. cimt was positively correlated with body mass index (r = 0.43), interventricular septal thickness (r = 0.58), posterior wall thickness (r = 0.54), and lvmi (r = 0.54). cimt and lvmi were positively associated after accounting for age, gender, and body mass index. these findings raise the possibility that carotid duplex ultrasound, by indicating the presence of early arterial wall changes, may be useful for predicting other cardiovascular sequelae in hypertensive children.

plastic bronchitis is a condition in which large, bronchial casts with rubber-like consistency develop in the tracheobronchial tree and cause airway obstruction. we describe a 4-year-old girl who had fontan physiology and who developed plastic bronchitis and report for the first time the use of aerosolized tissue plasminogen activator for treatment of this condition. the literature is reviewed with emphasis placed on the occurrence of this disorder in patients with single ventricle physiology.

we present a case of left ventricular thrombus in a child with a normal functioning left ventricle. the diagnosis was made by 2-dimensional echocardiography after 2 episodes of systemic emboli. hereditary protein c deficiency diagnosed in the patient provides the probable pathogenesis of the thrombus formation. systemic emboli necessitates cardiac examination, and in cases of unusual thrombi, hereditary or acquired thrombophilic risk factors should be considered.

we examined parental preferences for locus of service delivery for their teenager's congenital heart disease (chd) and the influence of disease severity, sociodemographic factors, and insurance on these preferences. a consecutive sample of parents of teenagers followed in a pediatric cardiology clinic completed a mailed questionnaire. disease severity was classified as low (=1 cardiovascular procedure), moderate (>1 cardiovascular procedure), and high (cyanosis or single ventricle physiology). eighty-six of 148 parents responded (58%): 40, low severity; 36, moderate severity; and 10, high severity of illness. parents preferred using primary care providers (pcps) as a point of first contact for all 11 of 11 general health concerns and 5 of 7 potential cardiovascular-related concerns: chest pain (52%), syncope (73%), seeming seriously ill (79%), sports physical examination (79%), and endocarditis prophylactic antibiotics (94%). increasing disease severity was significantly associated with preferring cardiologists for 6 of 7 cardiovascular-related concerns. overall, 58% of parents viewed their care as a pcp-cardiologist comanagement model versus a cardiologist-dominated model. lower family income (odds ratio [or]: 1.5; confidence interval [ci]: 1.0-2.2) and severity of illness (or: 2.1; ci: 1.0-4.4) were associated with a comanagement model of health care versus a cardiologist-dominated model. this study suggests that the majority of parents of teenagers with chd prefer to use their teenager's pcp for all routine health care needs and many cardiovascular health needs. severity of illness and family income are positively associated with greater preference for cardiologist care.

neonatal jaundice must have been noticed by caregivers through the centuries, but the scientific description and study of this phenomenon seem to have started in the last half of the 18th century. in 1785 jean baptiste thimotée baumes was awarded a prize from the university of paris for his work describing the clinical course in 10 jaundiced infants. the work by jaques hervieux, which he defended for his doctor of medicine degree in 1847, was, in many respects, a landmark. he had autopsied 44 jaundiced infants and apparently had clinical observations on many others. his descriptions of pathoanatomical findings were very detailed and systematic. a number of his clinical observations are still thought to be accurate today, such as the essentially benign nature of neonatal jaundice in most cases, the appearance of neonatal jaundice during the first 2 to 4 days of life as well as its disappearance within 1 to 2 weeks, and the cephalocaudal progression of jaundice. he described jaundice of the brain in 31 of his 44 autopsied cases, with variable intensity of staining. johannes orth was an assistant to the famous virchow in berlin, when in 1875 he published the results of an autopsy of a jaundiced term infant. the brain was notable for an intense yellow staining of the basal ganglia, the wall of the third ventricle, the hippocampus, and the central parts of the cerebellum. while the contribution of orth was limited to this single case report, in 1903 christian schmorl presented the results of his autopsies of 120 jaundiced infants to the german society for pathology. all of these infants' brains were jaundiced, but only 6 cases demonstrated a staining phenomenon similar to that previously described by orth. schmorl coined the term kernicterus (jaundice of the basal ganglia) for this staining pattern. although the following century of scientific study has added an enormous amount of information about the epidemiology and pathophysiology of neonatal jaundice and kernicterus, the contributions of hervieux, orth, and schmorl will undoubtedly continue to be seen as historical landmarks in our quest for understanding of these phenomena.

minor cranial ultrasound abnormalities, such as mild ventricular enlargement, choroid plexus cysts, and subependymal cysts, have been identified in 3% to 5% of the newborn population. although clinicians generally consider these abnormalities to be insignificant for the outcome of the newborn, few convincing data have been published to support this optimism. the objectives of this study were to identify potential risk factors associated with the identification of cranial ultrasound abnormalities at birth and to determine if the abnormalities were related to neurobehavioral sequelae in the newborn. three hundred eight women were enrolled in this prospective, longitudinal maternal-infant health and development study either at the time they entered the public health care system for prenatal care or at delivery if they had no prenatal care. each woman participated in an in-depth psychosocial interview at the end of each trimester of pregnancy. retrospective chart review by experienced medical personnel was used to compile data for the hobel perinatal risk score for each study participant after delivery. offspring underwent cranial ultrasound evaluation, the amiel-tison neurologic assessment, and the brazelton neonatal behavioral assessment scale within 96 hours of birth by experienced examiners blinded to any maternal-infant history. of the 308 women originally enrolled in the study, 301 delivered living infants. of these, 266 infants (88%) underwent a cranial ultrasound evaluation and are the subject of this article. for the purposes of the current study, infants were divided into those with normal (n = 239) and those with abnormal (n = 27) ultrasound results. abnormal ultrasound results included the following lesions: subependymal cyst (n = 13); mild ventricular enlargement (n = 6); choroid plexus cysts (n = 3); a combination of cysts and increased ventricular size (n = 2); a 7-mm midline cyst in the superior posterior portion of the third ventricle (n = 1); subependymal hemorrhage and ventricular enlargement (n = 1); and increased ventricular size, subependymal hemorrhage and cysts, and two small, right thalamic calcifications (n = 1). there were no significant differences between those with an abnormal ultrasound and those with a normal ultrasound for birth weight, length, gestational age, rate of prematurity, frequency of nulliparity, or frequency of small for gestational age infants. however, infants with an abnormal ultrasound had a significantly smaller mean head circumference than those with a normal ultrasound (34.5 +/- 1.9 cm vs 33.7 +/- 1.9 cm). the infants with an abnormal ultrasound had a higher median prenatal (50 vs 45), neonatal (14 vs 8), and total (94 vs 77) hobel risk score but not a higher labor-delivery score. there were no significant differences when these groups were compared on additional risk factors not included in the hobel scoring system such as race and socioeconomic status. in addition, mothers who used a greater number of drugs during the first trimester of pregnancy were more likely to have an infant with an abnormal ultrasound at birth such that the probability of having an abnormal ultrasound rose to 22% by the time the pregnant women were using four drugs. neurologic examinations revealed no differences between the infants with normal and abnormal ultrasounds. there were also no group differences for five of the seven brazelton cluster scores, the excitable or depressed clusters, or eight of the nine qualifier scores. however, infants with abnormal ultrasounds performed significantly better on the habituation (7.3 +/- 0.8 vs 6.6 +/- 1.5) and autonomic regulation (6.5 +/- 0.8 vs 6.0 +/- 1.0) clusters but more poorly on the cost of attention qualifier score (4.9 +/- 1.2 vs 5.5 +/- 1.2) on the brazelton neonatal behavioral assessment scale. infants with an abnormal cranial ultrasound at birth had higher perinatal risk scores. (abstract truncated)

to investigate preterm infants, we have installed in our neonatal intensive care unit a dedicated magnetic resonance (mr) imaging system which was specifically designed for neonatal use. the aim of this study was to describe the mr appearances of the brain in preterm infants who were first scanned between 25 and 32 weeks gestational age (ga) and to outline changes to the brains of these infants between their first scan and term. preterm infants of 25 to 32 weeks ga were imaged using the 1t neonatal mr system (oxford magnet technology, eyensham, oxfordshire, england/picker international, cleveland, oh). the scanning protocol included t1-weighted conventional spin echo (repetition time [tr], 600; echo time, 20 ms), inversion recovery fast spin echo (tr, 3530; effective echo time, 30; inversion time, 950 ms), and t2-weighted fast spin echo (tr, 3500; effective echo time, 208 ms) sequences. seventeen infants of median 28 weeks ga (range, 24 to 31 weeks) at birth were imaged a total of 53 times between birth and term. the median number of images per infant was two (range, 1 to 9). in infants of < 30 weeks ga, the germinal matrix was visualized at the margins of the lateral ventricles. it had a short t1 and short t2 and the bulk of it involuted at between 30 and 32 weeks ga. the white matter had a relatively homogeneous low signal except for bands of altered signal (probably originating from regions containing radial glia and migrating cells) which were most apparent anterolateral and posterolateral to the lateral ventricles. myelination was seen in the posterior brainstem, cerebellum, and region of the ventrolateral nuclei of the thalamus. infants had very little cortical folding at 25 weeks ga but this developed later in an orderly fashion. the neonatal mr system allowed extremely preterm infants to be studied safely with mr imaging. the images acquired demonstrated the germinal matrix, early myelination, and early cortical folding. evolution of these features was demonstrated with serial studies.

the purpose of this study was to assess the neurodevelopmental status of children after fontan repair of functional single ventricle and to examine the relationship between cognitive function and selected patient characteristics. neurodevelopmental tests including the stanford-binet intelligence (iq) scale and the developmental test of visual motor integration (vmi) were administered to 32 children (26 months to 16 years of age) with complex single ventricle. the mean and distribution of iq and vmi scores were compared with population norms. the relationship between test scores and patient characteristics was examined utilizing analysis of variance and correlational methods. the majority of children had intellectual function within the normal range (mean, 97.5 +/- 12.1). below average vmi scores were found in 21.4% of children. there were no significant correlations between intellectual function or visual motor integration ability and preoperative oxygen saturation or age at fontan. children who had deep hypothermic circulatory arrest during a prior norwood procedure tended to have a lower iq score. intellectual development in children with fontan repair of complex heart defects is essentially within the normal range. visual motor integration deficits may be more prevalent in these children. in our population, the duration and degree of preoperative hypoxemia had no apparent effect on cognitive function.

approximately 32 000 nonpowder firearm injuries are reported annually with more than 60% occurring in the pediatric population. case reports of serious and fatal injuries have been described; however, no large inclusive series have been published. we reviewed an 11-year experience of an urban pediatric emergency department to evaluate the circumstances, spectrum of injuries, and outcomes attributable to nonpowder firearms. a retrospective, descriptive case series of all children 18 years of age or younger evaluated at an urban children's hospital from january 1983 through december 1994 were eligible for study. patients were identified using a computerized database, the national electronic injury surveillance system, and the trauma registry in the department of surgery. medical records were reviewed to collect demographic information, circumstances of injury, anatomic site and type of injury, treatment, and outcomes for nonpowder firearm injuries. one hundred eighty patients were identified, and a complete data set was available for 166 (92%). the mean age was 12 +/- 3.7 years, 24% of children were <10 years old, and 71% of the children were male. three patients returned with a second nonpowder firearm injury during the study period. forty-nine percent of injuries were intentional and 44% of all injuries occurred during the summer and early fall months. the most common sites of injury were the extremity/buttocks (39%), head and neck (33%), thorax (13%), and eye (8%). serious injuries included intracranial hemorrhage, cardiac right ventricle laceration, hyphema, and abdominal visceral injury (liver laceration, pancreatic laceration, intestinal perforation). the majority of wounds required local wound care, and the children (74%) were discharged from the emergency department. of the patients admitted to the hospital (27%), 45% required operative intervention. there were no deaths. seven percent (12/166) of patients sustained some functional deficit with 42% (5/12) the result of an ocular injury. the majority of nonpowder firearm injuries are minor; however, the potential for serious injury should not be underestimated. minor injuries can be treated with local wound care and tetanus prophylaxis, and patients can be discharged from the emergency department. education of parents and children to the potential risks associated with these weapons is essential. stricter regulations regarding ownership of nonpowder firearms and mandatory safety instruction should be considered.

neurodevelopmental impairment has been identified in children infected with human immunodeficiency virus (hiv). the frequency and spectrum of neurologic impairment are greater in children than those reported for adults. in children, hiv is known to enter the central nervous system early in the course of the disease. the presentation of pediatric neuro-acquired immune deficiency syndrome ranges from static (eg, nonprogressive developmental delay) to progressive encephalopathy (eg, acquired microcephaly, pyramidal tract signs, and spasticity). it has been demonstrated that antiretroviral agents can improve or even reverse the course of neurologic impairment in children. these changes have been attributed to various degrees of central nervous system drug penetration. increasingly, protease inhibitors and combination antiretroviral therapy using reverse transcriptase inhibitors are being used in the treatment of children infected with hiv. the addition of a protease inhibitor to nucleoside analogue therapy has been reported to delay disease progression and prolong life in adults with moderate to advanced hiv disease. no data currently exist on the impact of combination therapy using two nucleoside analogues and a protease inhibitor on neurodevelopmental and neurologic function in children with hiv infection. the following case report presents the effects of combination therapy using ritonavir in a child infected with hiv. an 8-year, 2-month-old african-american boy was infected with hiv through vertical transmission. regular monitoring of the patient's neurodevelopmental status has been conducted as part of his participation in longitudinal research protocols. for the first 51/2 years of life, his neurodevelopmental status was normal, with cognitive functioning as measured by standardized psychometric tools solidly in the average range. speech and language skills were age-appropriate. tests of gross and fine motor functioning as well as evaluation of overall neurodevelopmental status suggested normal development. magnetic resonance imaging (mri) of the brain was consistently normal. his family reported that adaptive functioning, peer and family relationships, and behavior were all within normal limits. school reports indicated consistently that the patient was performing at age and grade level, with respect to both academic achievement and behavior. initial concerns regarding the patient's development were expressed by both his family and school at age 6 years, 6 months. these concerns included difficulty with classroom work, decreased attention, word-finding problems, fatigue, staring spells, and loss of strength. his family and school reported a marked loss of skills acquired previously. results of formal psychological and speech and language evaluation reflected statistically significant drops in test scores from baseline, with both delayed and atypical skills evident. the patient's condition worsened rapidly. within a few months, he was no longer able to use sentences to communicate. cognitive testing was attempted, but he was unable to participate because of significant fatigue, limited attention, and inability to communicate verbally. his family described periods of disorientation and confusion, lethargy, and disinterest in age-appropriate activities. he became agitated and overstimulated easily both in small group settings and in crowds. he demonstrated both fine and gross motor impairments. when frustrated, he displayed infantile and autistic-like behavior. mri with contrast showed diffuse atrophy as well as mild prominence of the ventricles and sulcii compared with baseline assessment. in addition to fatigue and neurologic symptoms, wasting syndrome was diagnosed, with loss of percentiles in both weight and height by age 71/2 years. low-grade elevation of liver function tests and amylase was noted. blood cultures for mycobacteria were negative, as were serologic tests for hepatitis. (abstract trun

to determine whether accelerated idioventricular rhythm (aivr) is benign in pediatric patients. the records were reviewed of all patients younger than age 15 years who had been diagnosed with a ventricular arrhythmia between 1976 and 1991. aivr was diagnosed in 12 patients, ages 1 day to 15 years (mean, 8.9 years). in 3 patients the arrhythmia was discovered on ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring after presentation with syncope or presyncopal symptoms. one patient had palpitations. the remaining diagnoses were made during routine examinations or at postoperative follow-ups for congenital heart disease. the aivr rate ranged from 90 to 150 beats per minute. the rate was within 10 beats per minute of the preceding sinus rate in 11 patients. echocardiograms were normal in 8 patients. two patients had double-outlet right ventricles; 1 had repair of the tetralogy of fallot; and 1 had abnormal ventricular septal motion. seven patients were taking antiarrhythmia medication without control of the aivr at presentation. patients were followed for a mean of 68.4 months (range, 31 to 191 months). all patients were alive and asymptomatic, with normal activity at the last follow-ups. complete resolution of aivr may not occur. however, aivr seems to be a benign arrhythmia. treatment was not effective in controlling the arrhythmia and is likely unnecessary.

catheter ablation of an accessory atrioventricular connection using 500-khz radiofrequency current was attempted in 10 children and adolescents aged between 6 and 15 years (mean 10.5 years). six children had the wolff-parkinson-white syndrome and four had tachyarrhythmias related to a retrograde-only conducting ("concealed") accessory connection. no child had associated structural heart disease. symptoms ranged from disabling palpitations to episodes of syncope (three patients) and cardiac arrest (one patient). ablation was attempted from the left ventricle in all children; in one child, ablation of a second, right-sided pathway was attempted via a right atrial approach. ten of the 11 accessory connections were interrupted successfully. a single complication was encountered in a 10-year-old girl in whom the procedure had to be terminated because a thrombotic occlusion of the right internal iliac artery had evolved. a simplification of the ablation procedure associated with reduced procedure duration and radiation exposure time was achieved in three children with the wolff-parkinson-white syndrome and a left free-wall accessory pathway when a single catheter placed in the left ventricle was used for pathway localization as well as ablation. it is concluded that catheter ablation using radiofrequency current is effective and safe and may supersede surgery as the curative treatment for children with serious symptoms mediated by an accessory atrioventricular connection.

a family having two boys with progressive encephalomyopathy and fumaric aciduria due to fumarase deficiency is described. both patients initially presented with polyhydramnios and enlarged cerebral ventricles in utero, with subsequent cerebral atrophy, severe developmental delay, infantile spasms, and hypsarythmia on electroencephalogram. fumarase activity in blood mononuclear cells and in the mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions of cultured skin fibroblasts was less than 0.5% of the control mean or undetectable. the older boy died at the age of 5 years and 4 months and the younger one is now 2 years and 10 months. the unrelated parents are symptomless and the other three children in the family are clinically healthy. fumarase activities in the blood mononuclear cells of the father, mother, sister, and two brothers were 59%, 52%, 52%, 120%, and 44% of the control mean, respectively. the results strongly support autosomal recessive inheritance of fumarase deficiency and suggest its consideration in children with congenital hydrocephalus, progressive brain atrophy, and infantile spasms.

serial neurosonographic examinations are routinely performed at frequent intervals during the nursery course of all preterm infants of 33 weeks or less gestation who are admitted to the intensive care nursery of thomas jefferson university hospital. after discharge, the following survivors during the past 5 years had repeated ultrasound examinations until the anterior fontanel closed and clinical assessments until the presence or absence of cerebral palsy at a minimum age of 12 months was established: all infants with grade iii/iv intracranial hemorrhage, periventricular echodensity and periventricular cyst formation, selected infants with either normal ultrasound findings or grade i/ii intracranial hemorrhage. fifteen survivors were found to have cerebral palsy, and all had at least one of the following ultrasound abnormalities: diffuse, bilateral, and multiple periventricular cysts 3 mm or more in diameter that persisted beyond term age, bilateral asymmetrical dilation of the lateral ventricles following grade iii intracranial hemorrhage with small periventricular cysts, and ventricular porencephaly following an ipsilateral grade iv intracranial hemorrhage. the periventricular cysts were usually preceded by extensive echodensities of the white matter surrounding the lateral ventricles; these findings were suggestive of periventricular leukomalacia and were the most common abnormal findings on ultrasound in the infants with cerebral palsy. of 124 infants without cerebral palsy, 121 had no or less severe abnormal findings on ultrasound; the exceptions were three infants with bilateral persistent large periventricular cysts who had normal motor development in late infancy.

serial lumbar punctures for the management of neonatal posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus without intracranial hypertension were evaluated in 16 infants. cranial ultrasonography to evaluate ventricular size and the ladd monitor at the anterior fontanel to measure intracranial pressure were utilized immediately before and after lumbar puncture. in 12 patients, a decrease in ventricular size and in anterior fontanel pressure could be effected with each lumbar puncture. in these infants, cessation of progression of the hydrocephalus and intermittent decreases in ventricular size were accomplished. in four patients, lumbar punctures were not successful in decreasing ventricular size or lowering intracranial pressure. two criteria could be defined to determine whether lumbar puncture could provide at least temporary benefit for the treatment of posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. the first of these is to establish the presence of communication between lateral ventricles and lumbar subarachnoid space by effecting a decrease in ventricular size and a decrease in intracranial pressure by removal of csf. the second criterion is to ascertain a critical volume of csf (usually relatively large) that must be removed in order to effect the above changes. cranial ultrasonography and measurement of intracranial pressure by application of the ladd monitor to the anterior fontanel are extremely valuable in the evaluation of lumbar punctures in the management of posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus.

there is a high incidence of hemorrhage in the germinal matrix and ventricular system in premature infants. existing systems of grading the extent of hemorrhage into germinal matrix and ventricles of premature babies have limitations. it is necessary to consider correlations of structure (neuroanatomy by ultrasound) with function (outcome of patient). it is suggested that a standardized worksheet for evaluation of cranial ultrasound usage in premature infants be adopted. such a worksheet allows uniformity of data collection and permits a more efficient method for evaluating correlations of structure with function.

ventricular dilation is common following intraventricular hemorrhage. neuropathologic studies have demonstrated that chronic posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus most commonly is a result of an obliterative arachnoiditis in the posterior fossa or is due to obstruction of flow of csf within the ventricular system. recent use of ultrasound scanning has demonstrated the occurrence of ventricular dilation within days of intraventricular hemorrhage (prior to the expected time of development of arachnoiditis). in the case described, serial real-time ultrasound scans demonstrated small mobile particles within dilated ventricles seven days following intraventricular hemorrhage. there was no obstruction of csf flow within the ventricular system. thus, in this case, ventricular dilation may have been secondary to plugging of arachnoid villi by the small particulate matter and, as a consequence, decrease in csf reabsorption.

radionuclide lumbar cisternography using indium 111-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (111in-dtpa) and a mobile gamma-camera with a converging collimator was utilized as a bedside procedure to evaluate csf dynamics and the patency of the cerebral ventricular system in 30 preterm infants with hydrocephalus. serial images of the brain were obtained at 0, 1, 2, 6, 24, and 48 hours after instillation of the isotope in the lumbar subarachnoid space. three distinct patterns were seen. infants with posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus displayed prompt ventricular filling but markedly delayed emptying with minimal flow over the cerebral convexities. infants with ventriculomegaly secondary to suspected brain atrophy or periventricular leukomalacia demonstrated a pattern of prompt ventricular filling, delayed emptying, but with flow present over the convexities. an infant with noncommunicating hydrocephalus secondary to an arnold-chiari malformation showed a pattern of complete obstruction with no ventricular filling. radionuclide lumbar cisternography appears to be a safe, well-tolerated procedure which produces images of sufficient resolution to provide valuable information about csf dynamics, delineating basal cisternae, ventricles, and subarachnoid flow paths.

the clinical syndrome of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (pphn) still carries high mortality in spite of improved neonatal care. the purpose of this prospective study was to assess the utility of m-mode echocardiography for the early identification of infants with pphn prior to clinical deterioration. echocardiograms of 51 infants who needed fractional inspiratory oxygen (fio2) greater than or equal to 0.25 to maintain adequate pao2 within 36 hours of life were compared to those of 115 healthy full-term and preterm newborns. of the 51 infants, ten had elevated systolic time interval ratios of both ventricles simultaneously (ventricular pre-ejection period to ventricular ejection time [rpep/rvet greater than or equal to 0.50, lpep/lvet greater than 0.38]). all of these newborns had pphn that was manifest clinically by 11 to 30 hours of age. the echocardiographic findings preceded clinical deterioration by at least one to five hours in all cases. the other 41 infants had clinical courses consistent with uncomplicated pulmonary disease. these data indicate that systolic time interval ratios, although not accurate measures of pulmonary arterial pressure and/or pulmonary vascular resistance, permit early identification of infants with pphn and separation from others with uncomplicated pulmonary disease.

in congenital porencephalies, diverticulation of the lateral ventricle is a dynamic process producing compression and stretching of the brain tissue bordering the diverticulum, bulging of the overlying skull, macrocephaly, and occasionally progessive neurologic signs (hemiplegia, raised intracranial pressure), even when the rest of the ventricular system is not dilated and the csf pressure is normal. ventriculoperitoneal shunting can result in remarkable improvement of focal motor deficits and may apparently also play a beneficial role on further mental development. successive computed tomography scans demonstrate that the brain parenchyma, which had been stretched by the porencephalic pouch, is capable of regaining near normal thickness. congenital porencephalies are initiated by a limited destructive brain lesion, but the gradual expansion of the ventricular herniation may imply a mechanism identical to that which has been postulated in normal pressure hydrocephalus. nine cases of unilateral "expanding" congenital porencephalies are presented and the treatment of this condition is discussed.

real time ultrasonography has been used to follow sequentially the changing size of the cerebral ventricles in an infant with posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. a method for quantitating ventricular size is presented and the rapidity with which ventricular size decreases following removal of cerebrospinal fluid is demonstrated.

to evaluate the cardiac anatomy and functional hemodynamics in young infants with chronic lung disease, nine patients, aged 2 to 7 months, with a clinical diagnosis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (bpd) underwent echocardiographic examination. all infants required supplemental o2 (mean fio2 35%) to maintain adequate systemic oxygenation (pao2 greater than 50 mm hg). none of the infants had evidence of a patent ductus arteriosus at the time of examination. echocardiographic measurements of left and right ventricular systolic time intervals revealed normal systolic time interval ratios suggesting pulmonary vascular resistances. however, echocardiographic evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy was found in eight of the nine infants, while right ventricular anterior wall thickness and right ventricular diastolic dimensions were not increased. two infants died; marked left ventricular hypertrophy was noted at the time of postmortem examination while the right ventricular wall thickness was normal. the findings of left ventricular hypertrophy led to a retrospective review of autopsy material of seven patients who died with bpd over the past year. in six of seven cases examined, left ventricular posterior wall thickening was noted (range 7 to 11 mm); while the right ventricular wall thickness was normal (range 2 to 5 mm). these data suggest that (1) as assessed by echocardiography, the pulmonary vascular resistance is not significantly elevated in young infants with bpd, and (2) a hypertrophic left ventricle evolves which may assume importance in the pathogenesis of pulmonary edema in bpd, though the precise etiology remains undetermined.

during obstetrical ultrasound examinations, 200 m-mode and 35 real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic studies were performed on 180 fetuses of high-risk pregnancies. fetal gestational ages ranged from 18 to 41 weeks. m-mode "sweeps" demonstrating mitral- and septal-aortic fibrous continuity were obtained in 115 studies. paradoxic septal motion in 50 fetuses suggested relarive right ventricular volume loading. congenital cardiac malformations were accurately diagnosed in a 34-week fetus with pulmonary atresia and hypoplastic right ventricle and in a 28-week fetus with a univentricular heart. congenital complete atrioventricular block was diagnosed in a 28-week fetus and atrial flutter with variable atrioventricular block was diagnosed in a 38-week fetus. the use of echocardiographic studies to evaluate cardiac structure and rhythm in utero assists in counseling prospective parents and in planning postnatal management for their offspring.

twin female infants were fed 120 gm of chicken liver homogenate daily for four months. they developed irritability, vomiting, and bulging anterior fontanelles. computed tomograms of the brain revealed enlarged ventricles in both infants and dilated subarachnoid spaces in one. plasma vitamin a concentrations were elevated. after all sources of vitamin a intake were stopped, the infants recovered without sequelae. the chicken liver homogenate contained 36,000 iu of vitamin a per 120 gm. since infants often receive 4,000 units of vitamin a daily from fortified milk and vitamin supplements, they probably cannot be fed 60 gm of chicken liver safely more often than once weekly.

a case of cerebral cysticercosis in an american child is described. the patient was only 2 years old and had never left the united states. her symptoms began with febrile seizures and progressed to focal motor seizures. cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis with eosinophilia, candle-guttering of the walls of the ventricles on pneumoencephalography, and a titer of 1:4,096 against cysticercosis antigen in her blood led to the diagnosis. over a five-year follow-up period, the patient's course has been one of resolution of her symptoms, improvement in her electroencephalogram, and excellent seizure control with anticonvulsant therapy. cysticercosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a child who shows csf pleocytosis with eosinophilia, particularly if accompanied by focal seizures.

a 10-year-old boy with congestive heart failure died in five months in spite of comprehensive medical treatment. autopsy showed patchy areas of endocardial fibroelastosis of the left ventricle. the sister of this patient had followed a similar course at 13 years of age with death within six months of the onset of congestive failure. her postmortem examination also showed endocardial fibroelastosis. the clinical presentation of familial endocardial fibroelastosis in the preteen and teenage years is a rare event. probably the endocardial fibroelastosis was secondary to a familial nonobstructive cardiomyopathy.

the sequence of events leading to the development of acute obstruction in two infants with coarctation has been defined by clinical, hemodynamic, and angiographic studies. one infant had normally related great arteries and an isolated coarctation, while the other infant had transposition with a hypoplastic right ventricle, a ventricular septal deffect, narrowing of the aortic isthmus, and a localized site of coarctation. in each instance, a posterior aortic shelf--the basic pathologic lesion in coarctation--could be observed angiographically. signs of aortic obstruction were absent, however, as long as the ductus arteriosus was widely patent. following ductal obliteration, femoral pulsations diminished, a peak systolic pressure difference was recorded between the ascending and descending aorta, and a discrete area of juxtaductal coarctation was seen. the basic malformation (posterior aortic curtain) would appear to exist in utero, possibly as an aortic branch point. this lesion is nonobstructive as long as blood can traverse the aortic isthmus through the aortic end of the ductus into the descending aorta. postnatally, as the ductus arteriosus undergoes constriction at its aortic insertion, signs of acute aortic obstruction may b  =ecome apparent. normal femoral arterial pulsations during the newborn examination do not definitively exclude coarctation. pediatricians should recheck at 2 weeks of age if the infant is asymptomatic or sooner if there are signs of cardiac failure to establish the presence or absence of this defect.

rapidly enlarging head circumference is a standard clinical sign of progressive hydrocephalus in an infant. six neonates 29 to 36 weeks gestational age, with intraventricular hemorrhage, confirmed by ventricular tap, had head circumferences measured at intervals from birth. the sudden appearance of rapidly expanding head size, not associated with changing clinical status, occurred 9 to 20 days after the estimated time of hemorrhage in all of the infants. air ventriculography within three days of abnormal acceleration of head circumference growth demonstrated moderately to severely dilated ventricles. the ventricles were probably enlarging slowing from the time of hemorrhage because there was no associated clinical deterioration in the infants coincident with the rapid increase in head circumference. after intraventricular hemorrhage, enlarging head circumference appears to be an insensitive sign of hydrocephalus in premature infants.

