the risk of infections is higher in children attending child care compared with children cared for at home. this study examined the effect of a combination of probiotics on absence from child care because of respiratory and gastrointestinal infections in healthy infants aged 8 to 14 months at the time of enrollment in child care. the probicomp study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. a total of 290 infants were randomly allocated to receive a placebo or a combination of bifidobacterium animalis subsp lactis and lactobacillus rhamnosus in a dose of 109 colony-forming units of each daily for a 6-month intervention period. absence from child care, occurrence of infant symptoms of illness, and doctor visits were registered by the parents using daily and weekly web-based questionnaires. median absence from child care was 11 days (interquartile range: 6-16). intention-to-treat analysis showed no difference between the probiotics and placebo groups (p = .19). additionally, there was no difference in any of the secondary outcomes between groups; the number of children with doctor-diagnosed upper or lower respiratory tract infections, the number of doctor visits, antibiotic treatments, occurrence and duration of diarrhea, and days with common cold symptoms, fever, vomiting, or caregivers' absence from work. a daily administration of a combination of b animalis subsp lactis and l rhamnosus for 6 months did not reduce the number of days absent from child care in healthy infants at the time of enrollment in child care.

the safety of cough and cold medication (ccm) use in children has been questioned. we describe the safety profile of ccms in children <12 years of age from a multisystem surveillance program. cases with adverse events (aes) after ingestion of at least 1 index ccm ingredient (brompheniramine, chlorpheniramine, dextromethorphan, diphenhydramine, doxylamine, guaifenesin, phenylephrine, and pseudoephedrine) in children <12 years of age were collected from 5 data sources. an expert panel determined relatedness, dose, intent, and risk factors. case characteristics and aes are described. of the 4202 cases reviewed, 3251 (77.4%) were determined to be at least potentially related to a ccm, with accidental unsupervised ingestions (67.1%) and medication errors (13.0%) the most common exposure types. liquid (67.3%), pediatric (75.5%), and single-ingredient (77.5%) formulations were most commonly involved. aes occurring in >20% of all cases included tachycardia, somnolence, hallucinations, ataxia, mydriasis, and agitation. twenty cases (0.6%) resulted in death; most were in children <2 years of age (70.0%) and none involved a therapeutic dose. the overall reported ae rate was 0.573 cases per 1 million units (ie, tablets, gelatin capsules, or liquid equivalent) sold (95% confidence interval, 0.553-0.593) or 1 case per 1.75 million units. the rate of aes associated with ccms in children was low. fatalities occurred even less frequently. no fatality involved a therapeutic dose. accidental unsupervised ingestions were the most common exposure types and single-ingredient, pediatric liquid formulations were the most commonly reported products. these characteristics present an opportunity for targeted prevention efforts.

the american academy of pediatrics strongly supports the polio eradication and endgame strategic plan of the global polio eradication initiative. this plan was endorsed in november 2012 by the strategic advisory group of experts on immunization of the world health organization and published by the world health organization in april 2013. as a key component of the plan, it will be necessary to stop oral polio vaccine (opv) use globally to achieve eradication, because the attenuated viruses in the vaccine rarely can cause polio. the plan includes procedures for elimination of vaccine-associated paralytic polio and circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cvdpvs). cvdpvs can proliferate when vaccine viruses are transmitted among susceptible people, resulting in mutations conferring both the neurovirulence and transmissibility characteristics of wild polioviruses. although there are 3 different types of wild poliovirus strains, the polio eradication effort has already resulted in the global elimination of type 2 poliovirus for more than a decade. type 3 poliovirus may be eliminated because the wild type 3 poliovirus was last detected in 2012. thus, of the 3 wild types, only wild type 1 poliovirus is still known to be circulating and causing disease. opv remains the key vaccine for eradicating wild polioviruses in polio-infected countries because it induces high levels of systemic immunity to prevent paralysis and intestinal immunity to reduce transmission. however, opv is a rare cause of paralysis and the substantial decrease in wild-type disease has resulted in estimates that the vaccine is causing more polio-related paralysis annually in recent years than the wild virus. the new endgame strategic plan calls for stepwise removal of the type 2 poliovirus component from trivalent oral vaccines, because type 2 wild poliovirus appears to have been eradicated (since 1999) and yet is the main cause of cvdpv outbreaks and approximately 40% of vaccine-associated paralytic polio cases. the endgame and strategic plan will be accomplished by shifting from trivalent opv to bivalent opv (containing types 1 and 3 poliovirus only). it will be necessary to introduce trivalent inactivated poliovirus vaccine (ipv) into routine immunization programs in all countries using opv to provide population immunity to type 2 before the switch from trivalent opv to bivalent opv. the global polio eradication initiative hopes to achieve global eradication of polio by 2018 with this strategy, after which all opv use will be stopped. challenges expected for adding ipv into routine immunization schedules include higher cost of ipv compared with opv, cold-chain capacity limits, more complex administration of vaccine because ipv requires injections as opposed to oral administration, and inferior intestinal immunity conferred by ipv. the goal of this report is to help pediatricians understand the change in strategy and outline ways that pediatricians can help global polio eradication efforts, including advocating for the resources needed to accomplish polio eradication and for incorporation of ipv into routine immunization programs in all countries. 

to investigate out-of-hospital medication errors among young children in the united states. using data from the national poison database system, a retrospective analysis of out-of-hospital medication errors among children <6 years old from 2002 through 2012 was conducted. during 2002-2012, 696,937 children <6 years experienced out-of-hospital medication errors, averaging 63,358 episodes per year, or 1 child every 8 minutes. the average annual rate of medication errors was 26.42 per 10,000 population. cough and cold medication errors decreased significantly, whereas the number (42.9% increase) and rate (37.2% increase) of all other medication errors rose significantly during the 11-year study period. the number and rate of medication error events decreased with increasing child age, with children <1 year accounting for 25.2% of episodes. analgesics (25.2%) were most commonly involved in medication errors, followed by cough and cold preparations (24.6%). ingestion accounted for 96.2% of events, and 27.0% of medication errors were attributed to inadvertently taking or being given medication twice. most (93.5%) cases were managed outside of a health care facility; 4.4% were treated and released from a health care facility; 0.4% were admitted to a non-critical care unit; 0.3% were admitted to a critical care unit; and 25 children died. this is the first comprehensive study to evaluate the epidemiologic characteristics of out-of-hospital medication errors among children <6 years of age on a national level. increased efforts are needed to prevent medication errors, especially those involving non-cough and cold preparations, among young children.

for centuries, many physicians and parents assumed that it was ethically justifiable to lie to a dying child. the reasoning was clear. because the lie would likely eliminate or prevent a concrete harm (the child's fear), and the lie is about a harm that is unavoidable anyway, a lie appeared to be the morally desirable thing to do. today, the ethical consensus has shifted. many doctors and other health professionals now argue that we have an obligation to tell children the cold, hard truth. in this article, i argue that "the cold, hard truth" (assuming we can know it with certainty) might not always be in the best interest of the patient. to illustrate the point, i analyze an episode in dostoevsky's novel, the brothers karamazov, in which a child is dying, his father lies to him about it, and 2 doctors take very different approaches to the truth. each of these individuals has a particular interest when it comes to the question of "the truth" about the death of ilyusha. i use this story to ask whether it is ethically permissible to lie to a dying child and, if so, who has the moral authority to tell that lie. 

to reduce dosing errors when administering orally ingested over-the-counter liquid medications, the us food and drug administration (fda) and the consumer healthcare products association released voluntary recommendations for dosing directions and dosing devices. this study assessed recommendation adherence for national brand name orally ingested over-the-counter liquid pediatric analgesics/antipyretics and cough, cold, and allergy medications available after the fda guidance was finalized in 2011 to identify and prioritize specific improvements to dosing directions and devices. recommendations were categorized as top tier or low tier based on potential to directly address ≥3-fold dosing errors. two independent reviewers assessed dosing directions and accompanying dosing devices for adherence to recommendations. of 68 products, 91% of dosing directions and 62% of dosing devices adhered to all top tier recommendations; 57% of products adhered to every top tier recommendation, and 93% adhered to all or all but one. a dosing device was included with all products. no dosing directions used atypical volumetric units (eg, drams), and no devices used volumetric units that did not appear in dosing directions. six products used trailing zeros or failed to use leading zeros with decimal doses; eight did not use small font for fractions. product adherence to low tier recommendations ranged from 26% to 91%. products adhered to most recommendations in the final fda guidance and consumer healthcare products association guideline, suggesting that these voluntary initiatives promote adherence to recommendations. improving adherence to recommendations should be prioritized based on potential to reduce harm.

mutations of scn4a encoding the skeletal muscle sodium channel nav 1.4 cause several types of disease, including sodium channel myotonias. the latter may be responsible for neonatal symptoms, including severe neonatal episodic laryngospasm (snel). establishing the diagnosis of scn4a-related snel early in the neonatal period is crucial because treatment is available that can reduce laryngospasm and improve vital and cerebral outcome. we report 2 new unrelated french patients who presented with snel. the first patient was initially diagnosed with laryngomalacia and underwent laryngeal surgery in the neonatal period before being diagnosed with myotonia at 14 months of age. the episodes of laryngospasm disappeared spontaneously, although occasional circumstances such as cold exposure could trigger laryngeal reactions; in addition, he developed myotonia corresponding to an adult myotonia permanens phenotype. this patient is now 24 years old and leading a normal life. the second patient was initially diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux, then snel; his condition improved with carbamazepine treatment, and he is now 6 months old. the diagnostic sequence in both patients was the same: first, severe episodic apneic attacks necessitating hospitalization occurring in the first week of life; second, observation of muscle hypertrophy and peripheral hypertonia with a clear myotonic pattern on electromyogram (at 14 and 3 months of age, respectively); third, genetic testing revealing de novo scn4a g1306e mutation. both patients have had good therapeutic response to sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine or mexiletine). 

to determine factors that affect caregivers' decisions about antibiotic use in children in settings where antibiotics are available without prescription. in a house-to-house survey, 1200 caregivers in 3 periurban districts of lima, peru, were asked about antibiotic use in young children. in this sample, 87.2% of children aged <5 years had received an antibiotic drug in their lives; 70.3% had received antibiotics before 1 year of age, and 98.8% of those had been prescribed by a physician. given hypothetical cases of common cold and nondysenteric diarrhea, caregivers would seek medical advice in 76.4% and 87.1%, respectively, and 84.6% of caregivers said they respected medical decisions even if an antibiotic was not prescribed. caregivers with high school-level education accepted 80% more medical decisions of not using an antibiotic and used fewer pharmacist-recommended antibiotics. for each additional year of life, the risk of self-medicated antibiotic use and the use of pharmacist-recommended antibiotics increased in 30%. (or: 1.3, 95% ci: 1.1-1.4, p = .001 and or: 1.3, 95% ci: 1.2-1.5, p < .001, respectively). caregivers respected a medical decision of not prescribing an antibiotic 5 times more when physicians had explained the reason for their advice (or: 5.0, 95% ci: 3.2-7.8, p < .001). prescribed antibiotic use in these young children is common. even if they are available without prescription, caregivers usually comply with medical advice and follow physicians' recommendations when antibiotics are not prescribed. improving physician prescribing habits could reduce irrational antibiotic use, decreasing future caregiver-driven misuse.

the american academy of pediatrics (aap) introduced revised return-to-care recommendations for mildly ill children in 2009 that were added to national standards in 2011. child care directors' practices in a state without clear emphasis on return-to-care guidelines are unknown. we investigated director return-to-care practices just before the release of recently revised aap guidelines. a telephone survey with 5 vignettes of mild illness (cold symptoms, conjunctivitis, vomiting/diarrhea, fever, and ringworm) was administered to randomly sampled directors in metropolitan milwaukee, wisconsin. directors were asked about return-to-care criteria for each illness. questions for return-to-care criteria were open-ended; multiple responses were allowed. answers were compared with aap return-to-care recommendations. a total of 305 directors participated. based on director responses to vignettes, the percentage of correct responses regarding return-to-child care management compared with aap return-to-care recommendations was low: fever (0%); conjunctivitis (0%); diarrhea (1.6%); cold symptoms (12%); ringworm (21%); and vomiting (80%). two illnesses (conjunctivitis and cold symptoms) would require the child to have an urgent medical evaluation or treatment not recommended by the aap, as follows: conjunctivitis-antibiotics for 24 hours (62%), physician visit (49%), any antibiotic treatment (6%), and symptom resolution (4%); and cold symptoms-physician visit (45.6%), antibiotics (10%), and symptom resolution (25%). directors' self-reported return-to-child care practices differed substantially before the release of revised aap return-to-care recommendations. active adoption of aap return-to-child care guidelines would decrease the need for unnecessary urgent medical evaluation and treatment as well as unnecessary exclusion of a child from child care.

involuntary tobacco smoke exposure causes substantial morbidity in children. we hypothesized that children exposed to tobacco smoke in the home would have increased school absenteeism with associated costs due to lost caregiver wages/time. we analyzed data on health and absenteeism among schoolchildren aged 6 to 11 years identified in the 2005 national health interview survey (nhis). we used multivariate models to assess the relationships between adult-reported household smoking and child health and school absenteeism. analyses were adjusted for children's and parents' demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. the value of lost caregiver time was estimated by using self-reported employment and earnings data in the nhis and publicly available time-use data. children living with 1 or ≥ 2 adults who smoked in the home had 1.06 (95% confidence interval [ci]: 0.54-1.55) and 1.54 (95% ci: 0.95-2.12) more days absent from school per year, respectively, than children living with 0 smokers in the home. living with ≥ 2 adults who smoked in the home was associated with increased reports of having ≥ 3 ear infections in the previous 12 months (adjusted odds ratio [aor]: 2.65 [95% ci: 1.36-5.16]) and having a chest cold in the 2 weeks before interview (aor: 1.77 [95% ci: 1.03-3.03]) but not with having vomiting/diarrhea in the previous 2 weeks (aor: 0.93 [95% ci: 0.45-1.89]). caregivers' time tending children absent from school was valued at $227 million per year. tobacco smoke exposure has significant consequences for children and families above and beyond child morbidity, including academic disadvantage and financial burden.

long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids such as docosahexaenoic acid (dha) influence immune function and inflammation; however, the influence of maternal dha supplementation on infant morbidity is unknown. we investigated the effects of prenatal dha supplementation on infant morbidity. in a double-blind randomized controlled trial conducted in mexico, pregnant women received daily supplementation with 400 mg of dha or placebo from 18 to 22 weeks' gestation through parturition. in infants aged 1, 3, and 6 months, caregivers reported the occurrence of common illness symptoms in the preceding 15 days. data were available at 1, 3, and 6 months for 849, 834, and 834 infants, respectively. the occurrence of specific illness symptoms did not differ between groups; however, the occurrence of a combined measure of cold symptoms was lower in the dha group at 1 month (or: 0.76; 95% ci: 0.58-1.00). at 1 month, the dha group experienced 26%, 15%, and 30% shorter duration of cough, phlegm, and wheezing, respectively, but 22% longer duration of rash (all p ≤ .01). at 3 months, infants in the dha group spent 14% less time ill (p < .0001). at 6 months, infants in the dha group experienced 20%, 13%, 54%, 23%, and 25% shorter duration of fever, nasal secretion, difficulty breathing, rash, and "other illness," respectively, but 74% longer duration of vomiting (all p < .05). dha supplementation during pregnancy decreased the occurrence of colds in children at 1 month and influenced illness symptom duration at 1, 3, and 6 months.

hypospadias is a congenital anomaly that affects up to 70 in 10 000 males. ingestion of drinking-water-disinfection byproducts such as trihalomethanes (thms) has been associated with hypospadias in a small sample. we examined risk of hypospadias and exposure to thms through water consumption and use. between september 2000 and march 2003, we interviewed mothers of 471 boys with hypospadias and 490 controls in southeast england about maternal water consumption, dishwashing, showering, bathing and swimming. we obtained residential thm concentrations from the water companies and linked them by using geographical information systems, which provided data on 468 case-subjects and 485 controls. thm exposures, except for ingestion of ≥ 6 μg/day of bromodichloromethane (odds ratio [or]: 1.65 [95% confidence interval (ci): 1.02-2.69]), were not associated with risk of hypospadias. elevated risk of hypospadias was associated with estimates of consumption of cold tap water at home (or: 1.71 [95% ci: 1.07-2.76]), total water (or: 1.70 [95% ci: 1.09-2.67]), bottled water (or: 1.64 [95% ci: 1.09-2.48]), and total fluid (or: 1.55 [95% ci: 1.01-2.39]) for the highest versus the lowest categories; the first 2 showed dose-response trends. evidence for an association between maternal water consumption and risk of hypospadias did not seem to be explained by thm exposure. factors that influence maternal water consumption or other contaminants in tap or bottled water might explain this finding. it is important that women maintain an adequate fluid intake during pregnancy.

a voluntary market withdrawal of orally administered, over-the-counter, infant cough and cold medications (ccms) was announced in october 2007. the goal of this study was to assess ccm-related adverse events (aes) among children after the withdrawal. emergency department (ed) visits for ccm-related aes among children <12 years of age were identified from a nationally representative, stratified, probability sample of 63 us eds, for the 14 months before and after announcement of withdrawal. after withdrawal, the number and proportion of estimated ed visits for ccm-related aes involving children <2 years of age were less than one-half of those in the prewithdrawal period (1248 visits [13.3%] vs 2790 visits [28.7%]; difference: -15.4% [95% confidence interval [ci]: -25.9% to -5.0%]), whereas the overall number of estimated ed visits for ccm-related aes for children <12 years of age remained unchanged (9408 visits [95% ci: 6874-11 941 visits] vs 9727 visits [95% ci: 6649-12 805 visits]). during both periods, two-thirds of estimated ed visits involved unsupervised ingestions (ie, children finding and ingesting medications). ed visits for ccm-related aes among children <2 years of age were substantially reduced after withdrawal of over-the-counter infant ccms. further reductions likely will require packaging improvements to reduce harm from unsupervised ingestions and continued education about avoiding ccm use for young children. monitoring of ccm-related harm should continue because recommendations were updated in october 2008 to avoid the use of ccms for children <4 years of age.

two patients encountered a first-degree cold burn after use of a deodorant spray. the spray-nozzle to skin-surface distance was approximately 5 cm, and the spraying lasted approximately 15 seconds. under laboratory conditions, the deodorant in use was able to induce a decline in temperature of >60 degrees c. these 2 cases highlight a little-known potential for skin damage by deodorant sprays if used improperly.

neonatal resuscitation guidelines recommend techniques to minimize heat loss in the delivery room. the use of humidified and heated gas is standard of care for preterm infants who need respiratory support in the nicu, but international resuscitation guidelines do not stipulate use of this therapy during stabilization at birth. we aimed to investigate the effect of humidified and heated gas on admission temperature in preterm infants who require respiratory support at birth. two cohorts of very preterm infants born at < or = 32 weeks' gestational age in the leiden university medical center were compared prospectively before (the "cold" cohort) and after (the "heated" cohort) introduction of the use of heated and humidified gas during respiratory support at birth (continuous positive airway pressure or intubation). the primary outcome was the infant's rectal temperature at admission in the nicu. there was a difference in the mean (sd) rectal temperature between the cold and heated cohorts (35.9 [0.6] vs 36.4 [0.6], respectively; p < .0001). normothermia (36.5 degrees c-37.5 degrees c) occurred less often in the cold cohort than in the heated cohort (12% vs 43%; p < .0001). there was no difference in occurrence of mild hypothermia (36.0 degrees c-36.4 degrees c) between groups (33% vs 35%; not significant). moderate hypothermia (<36.0 degrees c) occurred more often in the cold cohort (53% vs 19%; p < .001). the use of heated and humidified air during respiratory support in very preterm infants just after birth reduced the postnatal decrease in temperature. heating and humidifying the gas during stabilization merits additional investigation.

most previous studies on the association between moisture or mold problems in the home and respiratory symptoms in children were cross-sectional and based on self-reported exposure. the aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of objectively observed moisture damage and visible mold in the homes on early-life respiratory morbidity and atopic sensitization in a birth cohort. building inspection was performed by building engineers in the homes of 396 children, and the children were followed up with questionnaires from birth to the age of 18 months. specific immunoglobulin e levels were measured at the age of 1 year. doctor-diagnosed wheezing was associated with the severity of moisture damage in the kitchen and with visible mold in the main living area and especially in the bedroom of the child. the risk for parent-reported wheezing apart from cold increased with the severity of moisture damage in the kitchen. moisture damage in the bathrooms or other interior spaces had no significant association with wheezing. no significant associations were observed for other end points, such as cough, or respiratory infections. there was a suggestion for an increased risk for sensitization to cat dander linked with moisture and mold exposure. this birth-cohort study supports previous observations that moisture mold problems in the kitchen and in the main living area increase the risk for wheezing in early childhood. the results underline the importance of assessing separately the health effects of moisture and mold problems in different areas of the home.

probiotic consumption effects on cold and influenza-like symptom incidence and duration were evaluated in healthy children during the winter season. in this double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 326 eligible children (3-5 years of age) were assigned randomly to receive placebo (n = 104), lactobacillus acidophilus ncfm (n = 110), or l acidophilus ncfm in combination with bifidobacterium animalis subsp lactis bi-07 (n = 112). children were treated twice daily for 6 months. relative to the placebo group, single and combination probiotics reduced fever incidence by 53.0% (p = .0085) and 72.7% (p = .0009), coughing incidence by 41.4% (p = .027) and 62.1% (p = .005), and rhinorrhea incidence by 28.2% (p = .68) and 58.8% (p = .03), respectively. fever, coughing, and rhinorrhea duration was decreased significantly, relative to placebo, by 32% (single strain; p = .0023) and 48% (strain combination; p < .001). antibiotic use incidence was reduced, relative to placebo, by 68.4% (single strain; p = .0002) and 84.2% (strain combination; p < .0001). subjects receiving probiotic products had significant reductions in days absent from group child care, by 31.8% (single strain; p = .002) and 27.7% (strain combination; p < .001), compared with subjects receiving placebo treatment. daily dietary probiotic supplementation for 6 months was a safe effective way to reduce fever, rhinorrhea, and cough incidence and duration and antibiotic prescription incidence, as well as the number of missed school days attributable to illness, for children 3 to 5 years of age.

to assess children and adolescents with severe fatigue who are referred to pediatricians and to examine whether factors can be identified at their first visit that predict worse outcomes at 1 year. ninety-one patients, aged 8 to 18 years completed questionnaires about sleep, somatic symptoms, physical activity, and fatigue. they were reassessed 12 months later. measurements at baseline and outcome were analyzed by using univariable logistic regression with persistent, severe fatigue (yes/no) and persistent school absence (yes/no) as dependent variables and baseline scores as independent variables. after 12 months, 50.6% of the children and adolescents showed improvement; 29.1% had persistent fatigue, and 20.3% had persistent fatigue with significant school absence. factors associated with the poorest outcome were sleep problems (odds ratio [or]: 1.4 [95% confidence interval (ci): 1.1-1.8]), initial fatigue score (or: 1.1 [95% ci: 1.0-1.2]), somatic complaints such as hot and cold spells (or: 1.9 [95% ci: 1.2-3.0]), blurred vision (or: 2.1 [95% ci: 1.1-4.0]), pain in arms and legs (or: 2.0 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]), back pain (or: 1.8 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]), constipation (or: 1.7 [95% ci: 1.0-2.7]), and memory deficits (or: 1.8 [95% ci: 1.0-3.2]). resolved fatigue was associated with male gender (or: 5.0 [95% ci: 1.6-15.5]) and a physically active lifestyle (or: 1.3 [95% ci: 1.1-1.5]). assessment of predictive factors at the first visit enables the pediatrician to identify those patients with severe fatigue who are at risk of a poor outcome. female gender, poor sleep quality, physically inactive lifestyle, and specific somatic complaints were important predictive factors.

concerns about the safety and efficacy of over-the-counter cold medications have led to a recent us food and drug administration public health advisory against their use in children <2 years of age. our goal was to examine caregiver understanding of the age indication of over-the-counter cold medication labels and identify factors, associated with caregiver understanding. caregivers of infant children (< or =1 year old) were recruited from clinics at 3 institutions. questions were administered regarding the use of 4 previously common "infant" over-the-counter cold and cough medicines labeled to consult a physician if used in children <2 years of age. literacy and numeracy skills were assessed with validated instruments. a total of 182 caregivers were recruited; 87% were the infants' mothers. mean education level was 12.5 years, and 99% had adequate literacy skills, but only 17% had >9th-grade numeracy skills. when examining the front of the product label, 86% of the time parents thought these products were appropriate for use in children <2 years of age. more than 50% of the time, parents stated they would give these over-the-counter products to a 13-month-old child with cold symptoms. common factors that influenced parental decisions included label saying "infant," graphics (eg, infants, teddy bears, droppers), and dosing directions. caregivers were influenced by the dosing directions only 47% of the time. caregivers with lower numeracy skills were more likely to provide inappropriate reasons for giving an over-the-counter medication. misunderstanding of over-the-counter cold products is common and could result in harm if medications are given inappropriately. label language and graphics seem to influence inappropriate interpretation of over-the-counter product age indications. poorer parental numeracy skills may increase the misinterpretation of these products. opportunities exist for the food and drug administration and manufacturers to revise existing labels to improve parental comprehension and enhance child safety.

isolated cases of camphor-induced seizures have been reported in young children after gastrointestinal, dermal, and inhalation exposure. in 1982, after a series of unintentional ingestions of camphor products, the us food and drug administration restricted the camphor content to <11% in some products intended for medicinal use. camphor products intended for use as pesticides must be registered with the us environmental protection agency. still, many imported camphor-containing products fail to meet food and drug administration and environmental protection agency requirements for labeling and content. to describe a cluster of cases of camphor-associated seizure activity resulting from the availability of imported camphor products in certain ethnic populations that use it as a natural remedy. we present 3 cases of seizures associated with imported, illegally sold camphor in young children who presented to a large, urban children's hospital in bronx, new york, during a 2-week period. the children's ages ranged from 15 to 36 months. two children ingested camphor, and 1 child was exposed through repetitive rubbing of camphor on her skin. all 3 patients required pharmacologic intervention to terminate the seizures. one patient required bag-valve-mask ventilation for transient respiratory depression. all 3 patients had leukocytosis, and 2 patients had hyperglycemia. exposure occurred as a result of using camphor for spiritual purposes, cold remedy, or pest control. after identification of these cases, the new york city department of health released a public health warning to keep camphor products away from children. similar warnings were issued later by other state health departments. these cases highlight the toxicity associated with camphor usage in the community and that inappropriate use of illegally sold camphor products is an important public health issue. camphor may be a common, yet unrecognized, source of seizures in children in certain ethnic populations that use it as a natural remedy. efforts are needed to educate the communities about the hazards of using camphor products and to limit the illegal availability of these products.

in 1889, when dr john bland-sutton, a prominent surgeon in london, england, was consulted concerning fatal rickets in more than 20 successive litters of lion cubs at the london zoo, he evaluated the role of diet relative to the development of rickets. he prescribed goat meat and bones and cod-liver oil to be added to the lean horse-meat diet of the cubs and their mothers. rickets reversed, the cubs survived, and litters were reared successfully. in classic controlled studies conducted in puppies and young rats 3 decades later, the crucial role of calcium, phosphate, and vitamin d in both prevention and therapy of rickets was elucidated. later studies led to the identification of the structural features of vitamin d. although the bland-sutton interventional diet obviously provides calcium and phosphate from bones and vitamin d from cod-liver oil, other benefits of this diet were not initially recognized. chewing bones promotes tooth and gum health and removes bacteria-laden tartar. cod-liver oil also contains vitamin a, which is essential for the prevention of infection and for epithelial cell health. taurine-conjugated bile salts are also necessary for the intestinal absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, including a and d. moreover, unlike dogs and rats, all feline species are unable to synthesize taurine yet can only conjugate bile acids with taurine. this sulfur-containing beta-amino acid must be provided in the carnivorous diet of a large cat. taurine-conjugated bile salts were provided in the oil cold-pressed from cod liver. the now famous bland-sutton "experiment of nature," namely, fatal rickets in lion cubs, was cured by the addition of minerals and vitamin d. however, gum health and the presence of taurine-conjugated bile salts undoubtedly permitted absorption of vitamin a and d, the latter promoting the cure of rickets.

this study provides population-based estimates of recent medical conditions, concurrent developmental disorders, and health impact and utilization indicators for us children with and without down syndrome. the sample included children 3 to 17 years of age in the 1997-2005 national health interview survey child sample core and specifically included 146 children with down syndrome, 604 children with mental retardation but without down syndrome, and 95 454 children without either condition reported. developmental and medical conditions, health status, and service use were reported by parents or other knowledgeable caregivers. after adjustment for demographic factors, children with down syndrome had higher odds, compared with children without mental retardation, of recent food/digestive allergy, frequent diarrhea/colitis, > or =3 ear infections in the previous year, very recent head/chest cold, and developmental disabilities other than mental retardation. they had increased odds that approached significance for recent seizures, very recent stomach/intestinal illness, and asthma. they had substantially higher rates (threefold or higher, compared with children without mental retardation) for nearly all health impact and health and special education service use measures. of note, >25% of children with down syndrome needed help with personal care, regularly took prescription medications, had recently seen a medical specialist, and received physical therapy or related therapy. the comparison group with mental retardation without down syndrome represented many children with multiple serious disabilities who also had high rates of medical conditions and high levels of health impact and service use. these findings provide empirical, population-based data to inform guidelines for frequent monitoring and support for children with down syndrome.

pseudoephedrine, a decongestant found in many cough-and-cold and allergy medications, has been associated with deaths and adverse events in young children; however, the absolute risks of pediatric pseudoephedrine use are difficult to assess because the number of children exposed on a population basis and typical patterns of use are unknown. in addition, use may be changing because of the combat methamphetamine epidemic act of 2005, which limited pseudoephedrine availability. we sought to describe the prevalence and patterns of pseudoephedrine use among us children and to assess any change since the 2005 law took effect. we analyzed data on pseudoephedrine use among 4267 children who were aged 0 to 17 years and enrolled from 1999 to 2006 in the slone survey, a national random-digit-dial telephone survey of medication use in the us population. overall, 214 children took pseudoephedrine in a given week. use was highest for children who were younger than 2 years. sixteen children (7.5% of users) took >1 pseudoephedrine-containing product within the same week, including 6 children who were younger than 2 years. of the pseudoephedrine products used, most were multiple-ingredient liquids (58.9%) and multiple-ingredient tablets (24.7%). fifty-two children (25.0% of users) took pseudoephedrine for >1 week, including 7 children who were younger than 2 years. use in 2006 (2.9%) was significantly lower than in 1999-2005 (5.2%). pseudoephedrine exposure, mostly in the form of multiple-ingredient products, is common among us children, especially children who are younger than 2 years, who are at the highest risk for toxicity and for whom safe dosing recommendations are lacking. concerning patterns of use include taking >1 pseudoephedrine-containing product concurrently and using pseudoephedrine for extended periods. pediatric pseudoephedrine use seems to be declining since the institution of the 2005 combat methamphetamine epidemic act.

apparent life-threatening events are a relatively common event in children for which there may be a number of causes. previous reports have suggested that poisonings, either accidental or intentional, may be causes of some events. however, this theory has not been systematically studied. we conducted a prospective, descriptive study of infants aged <2 years presenting to a pediatric emergency department of a large, urban tertiary care children's hospital with signs and symptoms of an apparent life-threatening event. all of the children presenting with an apparent life-threatening event were to undergo a standardized evaluation, which included obtaining a comprehensive urine toxicology screen. a positive toxicology screen result was defined as follows: a clinically insignificant screen result (identification of a medication that would not cause an apparent life-threatening event) or a clinically significant screen result (identification of a medication that could cause apnea or other event consistent with an apparent life-threatening event, even if it was a medication that the child was known to be taking). during the study period, 596 children presented to the emergency department with an apparent life-threatening event, and 274 (46.0%) had a toxicology screen performed. of 274 toxicology screen results, 50 were considered truly positive (18.2%), and 23 positive screen results were considered clinically significant (23 of 274 [8.4%]). thirteen toxicology screen results were positive for an over-the-counter cold preparation (13 of 274 [4.7%]). no parent admitted to having given his or her child an over-the-counter cold preparation. a substantial number of children presenting to the emergency department with an apparent life-threatening event had a positive toxicology screen result. in particular, a number of children were found to have been given an over-the-counter cold preparation. we would recommend that toxicology screens be included as part of the routine evaluation of children who present with an apparent life-threatening event.

pediatric cough and cold medications are widely marketed in the united states, but the precise patterns of use among children are not known. such information is especially important given recent reports suggesting that these medications are responsible for previously underappreciated serious adverse events and deaths among children. we sought to describe the prevalence and patterns of pediatric use of cough and cold medications, with particular attention to use among young children. we analyzed data on the use of cough and cold medications, defined as any oral medication that contains >or=1 antitussive, decongestant, expectorant, and/or first-generation antihistamine active ingredients, among 4267 us children who were younger than 18 years and enrolled during 1999-2006 in the slone survey, a national random-digit-dial telephone survey of medication use by the us population. in a given week, a cough and cold medication was used by 10.1% of us children. exposure was highest to decongestants (6.3%; mostly pseudoephedrine) and first-generation antihistamines (6.3%; most common were chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine, and brompheniramine), followed by antitussives (4.1%; mostly dextromethorphan) and expectorants (1.5%; almost exclusively guaifenesin). multiple-ingredient products accounted for 64.2% of all cough and cold medications used. exposure to antitussives, decongestants, and first-generation antihistamines was highest among 2- to 5-year-olds (7.0%, 9.9%, and 10.1%, respectively) followed by children who were younger than 2 years (5.9%, 9.4%, and 7.6%, respectively); expectorant use was low in all age groups. the use of cough and cold medications declined from 1999 through 2006. approximately 1 in 10 us children uses a cough and cold medication in a given week. the especially high prevalence of use among children of young age is noteworthy, given concerns about potential adverse effects and the lack of data on the efficacy of cough and cold medications in this age group.

the objective of this study was to determine whether caregivers had given infants who died unexpectedly over-the-counter cough and cold medications before the infant deaths to identify sociodemographic risk factors for their use. the arizona child fatality review program reviews the circumstances surrounding every child death that occurs in the state each year. by statute, the multidisciplinary review teams have access to all medical charts, autopsy reports, law enforcement reports, and other records for their review and use these data to determine the cause of death and its preventability. the data on all infants who died unexpectedly in 2006 and had an autopsy and postmortem toxicologic studies were reviewed for this analysis. ten unexpected infant deaths that were associated with cold-medication use were identified. the infants ranged in age from 17 days to 10 months. postmortem toxicology testing found evidence of recent administration of pseudoephedrine, antihistamine, dextromethorphan, and/or other cold-medication ingredients in these infants. the families who used these medications were poor and publicly insured, and 50% of them had limited english proficiency. only 4 of these infants had received medical care for their current illness before their death. the over-the-counter cough and cold medication had been prescribed by a clinician for only 1 of these infants. review of these infants' deaths raises concern about the role of the over-the-counter cough and cold medications in these deaths. these findings support the recommendation that such medications not be given to infants. in addition, these findings suggest that warnings on these medications "to consult a clinician" before use are not being followed by parents. educational campaigns to decrease the use of over-the-counter cough and cold medications in infants need to be increased.

adverse drug events in children from cough and cold medications have been identified as a public health issue with clinical and policy implications. nationally representative morbidity data could be useful for targeting age-appropriate safety interventions. to describe emergency department visits for adverse drug events from cough and cold medications in children. emergency department visits for adverse drug events attributed to cough and cold medications among children aged <12 years were identified from a nationally representative stratified probability sample of 63 us emergency departments from january 1, 2004, through december 31, 2005. annually, an estimated 7091 patients aged <12 years were treated in emergency departments for adverse drug events from cough and cold medications, accounting for 5.7% of emergency department visits for all medications in this age group. most visits were for children aged 2 to 5 years (64%). unsupervised ingestions accounted for 66% of estimated emergency department visits, which was significantly higher than unsupervised ingestions of other medications (47%), and most of these ingestions involved children aged 2 to 5 years (77%). most children did not require admission or extended observation (93%). timely national surveillance data can help target education, enforcement, and engineering strategies for reducing adverse events from cough and cold medications among children. engineering innovations could be particularly helpful in addressing unsupervised ingestions, which is the most frequent cause of adverse events. these innovations could be applicable to other children's medications.

a recurring epidemic of asthma exacerbations in children occurs annually in september in north america when school resumes after summer vacation. our goal was to determine whether montelukast, added to usual asthma therapy, would reduce days with worse asthma symptoms and unscheduled physician visits of children during the september epidemic. a total of 194 asthmatic children aged 2 to 14 years, stratified according to age group (2-5, 6-9, and 10-14 years) and gender, participated in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the addition of montelukast to usual asthma therapy between september 1 and october 15, 2005. children randomly assigned to receive montelukast experienced a 53% reduction in days with worse asthma symptoms compared with placebo (3.9% vs 8.3%) and a 78% reduction in unscheduled physician visits for asthma (4 [montelukast] vs 18 [placebo] visits). the benefit of montelukast was seen both in those using and not using regular inhaled corticosteroids and among those reporting and not reporting colds during the trial. there were differences in efficacy according to age and gender. boys aged 2 to 5 years showed greater benefit from montelukast (0.4% vs 8.8% days with worse asthma symptoms) than did older boys, whereas among girls the treatment effect was most evident in 10- to 14-year-olds (4.6% [montelukast] vs 17.0% [placebo]), with nonsignificant effects in younger girls. montelukast added to usual treatment reduced the risk of worsened asthma symptoms and unscheduled physician visits during the predictable annual september asthma epidemic. treatment-effect differences observed between age and gender groups require additional investigation.

otitis media is a frequent complication of a viral upper respiratory tract infection, and the reported co-incidence of those diseases increases with assay sensitivity and sampling density. we determined the incidence of otitis-media complications in young children when referenced to cold-like illnesses and to concurrent virus recovery from the nasopharynx. a total of 60 children from 24 families were followed from october 2003 through april 30, 2004, by daily parental recording of illness signs, weekly pneumatic otoscopic examinations, and periodic polymerase chain reaction assay of collected nasal fluids for common viruses. one hundred ninety-nine cold-like illnesses were observed, but a sample for virus assay was not collected concurrent with 71 episodes. of the remainder, 73% of cold-like illnesses were temporally related to recovery of 1 or a combination of the assayed viruses, with rhinovirus predominating. for non-cold-like illness periods, 54 (18%) of 297 assays were positive for virus, and the virus frequency distribution was similar to that for cold-like illnesses. there were 93 diagnosed otitis-media episodes; 65 (70%) of these occurred during a cold-like illness. for the 79 otitis-media episodes with available nasal samples, 61 (77%) were associated with a positive virus result. in this population, the otitis-media complication rate for a cold-like illness was 33%. a cold-like illness was not a prerequisite for polymerase chain reaction detection of viruses in the nose and nasopharynx of young children. viral detection by polymerase chain reaction in the absence of a cold-like illness is associated with complications in some subjects. otitis media is a complication of viral infection both with and without concurrent cold-like illnesses, thus downwardly biasing coincidence estimates that use cold-based illnesses as the denominator.

a refrigerator-stable formulation of proquad has been developed to expand the utility of proquad to areas in which maintenance of a frozen cold chain (-15 degrees c or colder) during storage and transport may not be feasible. the objective of this study was to demonstrate that the immunogenicity and safety profiles of a refrigerator-stable formulation of proquad are similar to the recently licensed frozen formulation. in this double-blind, randomized, multicenter study, healthy 12- to 23-month-old children with negative vaccination and clinical histories for measles, mumps, rubella, varicella, and zoster were vaccinated with either the refrigerator-stable formulation of proquad (n = 1006) or the frozen formulation of proquad (n = 513). patients were followed for 42 days after vaccination for adverse experiences. immunogenicity was evaluated 6 weeks after vaccination. the refrigerator-stable formulation of proquad was generally well tolerated. the incidence of adverse experiences was similar between groups. no vaccine-related serious adverse experiences were reported. for both groups, the response rate was > or = 97.7% for measles, mumps, and rubella, and the percentage of patients with a varicella zoster virus antibody titer of > or = 5 u/ml glycoprotein antigen-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay after vaccination was > or = 88.8%. the geometric mean titers for all antigens were numerically slightly higher in patients who received the refrigerator-stable formulation. the refrigerator-stable formulation of proquad is generally well tolerated, highly immunogenic, and noninferior in terms of postvaccination antibody responses. this refrigerator-stable formulation may improve ease of vaccine administration, increase use of the vaccine throughout the world because of its improved storage conditions, and replace the frozen formulation of proquad or any dose of m-m-rii and varivax in routine practice.

the goal was to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of an investigational, refrigerator-stable formulation of live attenuated influenza vaccine (cold-adapted influenza vaccine-trivalent) against culture-confirmed influenza, acute otitis media, and effectiveness outcomes in young children in day care over 2 consecutive influenza seasons. children 6 to <36 months of age who were attending day care were assigned randomly in year 1 to receive 2 doses of vaccine or placebo intranasally, 35 +/- 7 days apart. in year 2, subjects received 1 dose of the same treatment as in year 1. a total of 1616 subjects (vaccine: 951 subjects; placebo: 665 subjects) in year 1 and 1090 subjects (vaccine: 640 subjects; placebo: 450 subjects) in year 2 were able to be evaluated for efficacy. the mean age at first vaccination was 23.4 +/- 7.9 months. in year 1, the overall efficacy of the vaccine against influenza subtypes similar to the vaccine was 85.4%; efficacy was 91.8% against a/h1n1 and 72.6% against b. in year 2, the overall efficacy was 88.7%; efficacy was 90.0% against h1n1, 90.3% against a/h3n2, and 81.7% against b. efficacy against all episodes of acute otitis media associated with culture-confirmed influenza was 90.6% in year 1 and 97.0% in year 2. runny nose or nasal discharge after dose 1 in year 1 was the only reactogenicity event that was significantly more frequent with cold-adapted influenza vaccine-trivalent (82.3%) than placebo (75.4%). cold-adapted influenza vaccine-trivalent was well tolerated and effective in preventing culture-confirmed influenza illness in children as young as 6 months of age who attended day care.

pernio, or chilblains, is a localized inflammatory lesion of the skin resulting from an abnormal response to cold. five cases were seen among adolescent female patients who presented to our rheumatology service in a pediatric tertiary care center in the winter of 2003 to 2004. all 5 patients were thin (bmi of <25th percentile) and had either toes or fingers that were affected. for each, laboratory evaluation results were unremarkable, including negative antinuclear antibody profile results. symptomatic treatment, with or without medication, was recommended. pernio most commonly occurs among young women but may occur among older individuals or among children. because pernio develops among susceptible individuals who are exposed to nonfreezing cold, the lesions usually begin in the fall or winter and disappear in the spring or early summer. acute pernio may develop 12 to 24 hours after exposure to the cold. single or multiple erythematous, purplish, edematous lesions appear, accompanied by intense pain, itching, or burning. chronic pernio occurs with repeated exposure to the cold and the persistence of lesions. in an acute exacerbation, the major differential diagnosis alternative would be raynaud's phenomenon, which consists of sharply demarcated cutaneous pallor and cyanosis, followed by erythema, of far shorter duration (hours rather than days). frostbite is freezing of tissue, with resultant tissue necrosis. several conditions have been described as predisposing subjects to pernio, including the presence of cryoproteins, excessive cold exposure, and anorexia nervosa among children and systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid antibodies among adults. it is important, therefore, when evaluating a patient with pernio, both to exclude an underlying diagnosis and to determine whether additional testing is necessary. the lesions of acute pernio are usually self-limited but may lead to recurrent disease. the involved limb should be cleaned and dried, and rewarming should occur. prevention is the best form of therapy, and cold exposure should be minimized after an initial insult. the prognosis for properly treated pernio is excellent. nifedipine, which produces vasodilation, has been demonstrated to be effective in reducing pain, facilitating healing, and preventing new lesions of pernio. we think that the 5 cases seen in our rheumatology clinic represent an increase, compared with prior years; the dermatology clinic at the university of colorado reported a series of 8 children treated during a 10-year period. the reasons for the possible increase are likely multifactorial, with cold climate, a vulnerable population with thin body habitus, and cold exposure all being contributing causes. of note, the quality of cold in colorado is quite dry; however, the winter of 2003 to 2004 was not particularly colder or drier than prior years. all patients were very thin, and thin body habitus may be associated with increased cutaneous vasoreactivity. it is also unclear how these cases of pernio may reflect that winter's fashion trends (2 patients reported wearing sandals in winter). general pediatricians, particularly those who practice in colder climates, should be aware of the presentation and treatment of pernio in childhood.

erythromelalgia is a rare, chronic, debilitating condition characterized by redness, warmth, and severe burning pain of the distal extremities. the feet are more commonly affected than the hands. pain is precipitated by increases in temperature and by exercise. patients often obtain relief by immersing the affected extremity in cold water. the pain is often refractory to treatment. for many patients, multiple pain medications have been useless in achieving complete relief of pain symptoms. previous reports of erythromelalgia among adolescents indicated prolonged relief of pain with sodium nitroprusside infusions, epidural infusions of local anesthetics, or gabapentin treatment. we present a case of an 11-year-old, white, male child with primary erythromelalgia, whose initial symptoms started in his preschool years and whose childhood was marked by escalating episodes of pain with warmth and redness of his feet, precipitated especially by increases in temperature and by activity. all conventional pain management techniques had failed to relieve our patient of his symptoms, and he obtained some relief only by soaking his affected extremities in ice water. he had experienced minimal benefit from seeing a pain psychologist, who helped him develop techniques to cope with the pain. at the time of presentation, the patient's episodes of pain had increased to 15 to 20 per day, and there was evidence of chronic immersion injury to the skin of his feet. before his most recent hospitalization, the pain had spread to involve his hands as well. the patient was overwhelmed with anxiety and could not participate in school or social activities at the time of admission. during his current hospitalization, he did show some therapeutic response to sodium nitroprusside infusion, which unfortunately had to be discontinued because of side effects and because his family desired to leave the icu environment, which was stressful to the patient. he also had some response to lumbar epidural infusion of local anesthetics, which could not be continued because he found the motor blockade that accompanied his analgesia intolerable. however, intravenous lidocaine infusion, with subsequent transition to oral mexiletine therapy, proved very effective in reducing the frequency and severity of the pain episodes. the patient was discharged from the hospital with oral mexiletine therapy and has been monitored at the pain management clinic. he returned to and completed school, attended summer camp, and enjoys an active happy life. he walks without precipitating pain in his feet and sleeps 9 to 10 hours every night. he has needed to soak his feet on only 4 occasions in the 6 months since his discharge from the hospital. his quality of life has improved significantly. he has shown no evidence of liver toxicity, and his mexiletine levels have been stable.

pain among children and adolescents has been identified as an important public health problem. most studies evaluating recurrent or chronic pain conditions among children have been limited to descriptions of pain intensity and duration. the effects of pain states and their impact on daily living have rarely been studied. the objective of this study was to investigate the impact of perceived pain on the daily lives and activities of children and adolescents. in addition, we sought to delineate self-perceived triggers of pain among children and adolescents. in this study, we (1) document the 3-month prevalence of painful conditions among children and adolescents, (2) delineate their features (location, intensity, frequency, and duration), (3) describe their consequences (restrictions and health care utilization), and (4) elucidate factors that contribute to the occurrence of pain episodes among young subjects. the study was conducted in 1 elementary school and 2 secondary schools in the district of ostholstein, germany. children and adolescents, as well as their parents/guardians, were contacted through their school administrators. the teachers distributed an information leaflet, explaining the conduct and aim of the study, to the parents a few days before the official enrollment of the youths in the study. parents of children in grades 1 to 4 of elementary school were asked to complete the pain questionnaire for their children at home, whereas children from grade 5 upward completed the questionnaire on their own during class, under the supervision of their teachers. the response rate was 80.3%. as previously stated, chronic pain was defined as any prolonged pain that lasted a minimum of 3 months or any pain that recurred throughout a minimal period of 3 months. the children and adolescents were surveyed with the luebeck pain-screening questionnaire, which was specifically designed for an epidemiologic study of the characteristics and consequences of pain among children and adolescents. the questionnaire evaluates the prevalence of pain in the preceding 3 months. the body area, frequency, intensity, and duration of pain are addressed by the questionnaire. in addition, the questionnaire inquires about the private and public consequences of pain among young subjects. specifically, the questionnaire aims to delineate the self-perceived factors for the development and maintenance of pain and the impact of these conditions on daily life. of the 749 children and adolescents, 622 (83%) had experienced pain during the preceding 3 months. a total of 30.8% of the children and adolescents stated that the pain had been present for >6 months. headache (60.5%), abdominal pain (43.3%), limb pain (33.6%), and back pain (30.2) were the most prevalent pain types among the respondents. children and adolescents with pain reported that their pain caused the following sequelae: sleep problems (53.6%), inability to pursue hobbies (53.3%), eating problems (51.1%), school absence (48.8%), and inability to meet friends (46.7%). the prevalence of restrictions in daily living attributable to pain increased with age. a total of 50.9% of children and adolescents with pain sought professional help for their conditions, and 51.5% reported the use of pain medications. the prevalence of doctor visits and medication use increased with age. weather conditions (33%), illness (30.7%), and physical exertion (21.9%) were the most frequent self-perceived triggers for pain noted by the respondents. a total of 30.4% of study participants registered headache as the most bothersome pain, whereas 12.3% cited abdominal pain, 10.7% pain in the extremities, 8.9% back pain, and 3.9% sore throat as being most bothersome. a total of 35.2% of children and adolescents reported pain episodes occurring > or =1 time per week or even more often. health care utilization because of pain differed among children and adolescents according to the location of pain. children and adolescents with back pain (56.7%), limb pain (55.0%), and abdominal pain (53.3%) visited a doctor more often than did those with headache (32.5%). in contrast, children and adolescents with headache (59.2%) reported taking medication because of pain more often than did those with back pain (16.4%), limb pain (22.5%), and abdominal pain (38.0%). the prevalence of self-reported medication use and doctor visits because of pain increased significantly with age (chi2 test). the prevalence of self-reported medication use was significantly higher among girls than among boys of the same age, except between the ages of 4 and 9 years (chi2 test). the prevalence of restrictions in daily activities varied among children and adolescents with different pain locations; 51.1% of children and adolescents with abdominal pain and 43.0% with headache but only 19.4% with back pain reported having been absent from school because of pain. the prevalence of restrictions attributable to pain was significantly higher among girls than among boys of the same age, except between the ages of 4 and 9 years (chi2 test). the self-reported triggers for pain varied between girls and boys. girls stated more often than boys that their pain was triggered by weather conditions (39% vs 25%), illness (eg, common cold or injury) (35.9% vs 23.9%), anger/disputes (20.9% vs 11.9%), family conditions (12.1% vs 5.2%), and sadness (11.9% vs 3.4%). in contrast, boys stated more often than girls that their pain was triggered by physical exertion (28% vs 17.2%). we used a logistic regression model to predict the likelihood of a child paying a visit to the doctor and/or using pain medication. health care utilization was predicted by increasing age, greater intensity of pain, and longer duration of pain but not by the frequency of pain. we used a logistic regression model to predict restrictions in daily activities. only the intensity of pain was predictive of the degree of restrictions in daily life attributable to pain; the duration of pain and the frequency of pain episodes had no bearing on the degree to which the daily lives of the children were restricted because of pain. more than two thirds of the respondents reported restrictions in daily living activities attributable to pain. however, 30 to 40% of children and adolescents with pain reported moderate effects of their pain on school attendance, participation in hobbies, maintenance of social contacts, appetite, and sleep, as well as increased utilization of health services because of their pain. restrictions in daily activities in general and health care utilization because of pain increased with age. girls > or =10 years of age reported more restrictions in daily living and used more medications for their pain than did boys of the same age. we found gender-specific differences in self-perceived triggers for pain. pain intensity was the most robust variable for predicting functional impairment in > or =1 areas of daily life. increasing age of the child and increasing intensity and duration of pain had effects in predicting health care utilization (visiting a doctor and/or taking medication), whereas restrictions in daily activities were predicted only by the intensity of pain. our results underscore the relevance of pediatric pain for public health policy. additional studies are necessary and may enhance our knowledge about pediatric pain, to enable parents, teachers, and health care professionals to assist young people with pain management, allowing the young people to intervene positively in their conditions before they become recurrent or persistent.

maurice raynaud first described the vasospasm of arterioles in 1862, and raynaud's phenomenon is now felt to be common, affecting up to 20% of women of childbearing age. raynaud's phenomenon has been reported to affect the nipples of breastfeeding mothers and is recognized by many lactation experts as a treatable cause of painful breastfeeding. in 1997, lawlor-smith and lawlor-smith reported 5 women with raynaud's phenomenon associated with breastfeeding, but there are few other case reports, and none report the possible relationship between raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple and previous breast surgery. we report 12 women who breastfed 14 infants, all of whom were seen in 1 pediatric practice and 1 lactation consultation center in san francisco, california, within the past 3 years. of the 12 women, 11 were seen between june 2002 and may 2003. all women suffered from extremely painful breastfeeding, with symptoms precipitated by cold temperatures and associated with blanching of the nipple followed by cyanosis and/or erythema. poor positioning and poor attachment or latch may cause blanching of the nipple and pain during breastfeeding, but 10 of the 12 mothers were evaluated by experienced lactation consultations, who were sure that inappropriate breastfeeding techniques were not contributing factors. because the breast pain associated with raynaud's phenomenon is so severe and throbbing, it is often mistaken for candida albicans infection. it is not unusual for mothers who have raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple to be treated inappropriately and often repeatedly for c albicans infections with topical or systemic antifungal agents. eight of our 12 mothers and their infants received multiple courses of antifungal therapy without relief before the diagnosis was made. to diagnose raynaud's phenomenon accurately, additional symptoms such as precipitation by cold stimulus, occurrence of symptoms during pregnancy or when not breastfeeding, and biphasic or triphasic color changes must be present. all our mothers experienced precipitation of symptoms by cold stimuli and demonstrated biphasic or triphasic color changes, and 6 of the 12 experienced symptoms during pregnancy. interestingly 3 of 12 mothers also reported a history of breast surgery, including 1 mother who had a fibroadenoma removed and 2 who had breast-reduction surgery. the association between breast surgery/implants and autoimmune disease, including raynaud's phenomenon, has been discussed extensively, but the association of raynaud's phenomenon of the nipple during breastfeeding has not been reported previously. given the small numbers in the study, it is uncertain as to whether this may be a precipitating factor in developing raynaud's phenomenon. treatment options include methods to prevent or decrease cold exposure, avoidance of vasoconstrictive drugs/nicotine that could precipitate symptoms, and pharmacologic measures. there are reports in the lay press of the use of herbal medicines, aerobic exercise, and dietary supplements, but because most women with painful breastfeeding require immediate relief of the pain to continue breastfeeding successfully, it is important to offer a treatment plan that will alleviate the pain quickly. nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker, has been used to treat raynaud's phenomenon because of its vasodilatory effects. very little of the medication can be demonstrated in breast milk and thus is safe to use in breastfeeding mothers. of the 12 mothers in our series, 6 chose to use nifedipine, and all had prompt relief of pain. only 1 mother developed side effects from nifedipine. pediatricians and lactation consultants should be aware of this treatable cause of painful breastfeeding and should specifically question their patients, because most mothers will not provide this information to the breastfeeding consultant. prompt treatment will allow mothers to continue to breastfeed pain free while avoiding unnecessary antifungal therapy.

to characterize the features of cold urticaria in children, with particular focus on systemic reactions, because little pediatric data are available. chart reviews of 30 children <18 years old who were evaluated in the past 3 years at the children's hospital allergy program (boston, ma) and a private allergy practice. demographic, diagnostic, and therapeutic data were collected. telephone interviews of patients and/or their parents were performed to obtain follow-up data. our data showed that the mean and median ages of onset were approximately 7 years. no secondary causes were found. one third of patients had anaphylactic reactions. these reactions could not be predicted based on available variables. patients with negative cold-stimulation test (ice-cube challenge) at 10 minutes had similar symptoms and response to antihistamines as those patients with positive ice-cube-challenge test. in addition, our group of patients with cold urticaria had a strikingly high rate of asthma (46.7%) and allergic rhinitis (50%). the rate of family history of atopic diseases was even higher (89.3%). cold urticaria occurs in children and may be associated with anaphylaxis. in our series, no secondary causes were found. all patients with cold urticaria and their parents should be cautioned regarding the risk of anaphylaxis and provided with an epinephrine autoinjector.

to correlate the presence and levels of total mercury (thg) in cord blood and meconium indicating prenatal exposure with developmental milestones at 2 years and to compare these subjects with controls of comparable age using cognitive adaptive test and clinical linguistic auditory milestone scale (cat/clams). in 48 of the original tagum (t) subjects, cord blood and meconium hg levels, head circumference (hc) at birth, and duration of breastfeeding were correlated with cat/clams at 2 years. at 2 years, thg levels using cold atomic vapor absorption spectrometry were determined in the hair of 46 t subjects and 88 saranggani (s) controls; thg levels in blood were tested in 48 t subjects and 45 s controls. these levels were correlated with cat/clams. both groups had standard physical and neurologic examinations, hearing screen using transitory evoked otoacoustic emissions, serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase, and routine urinalysis. a prevalidated socioeconomic means test was given to both groups. the hg level in cord blood was negatively correlated with cat/clams at 2 years. the hc at birth was negatively correlated with levels of hg in hair of t subjects 2 years later. hc at birth and 2 years hence were positively correlated with cat/clams. the following were significantly higher in s controls than in t subjects: expressive language quotient 82.569 +/- 2.21 versus 71.57 +/- 2.61; clams 87.96 +/- 2.43 versus 77.67 +/- 2.51; cat 90.57 +/- 2.22 versus 83.15 +/- 1.43; and full-scale developmental quotient 89.31 +/- 2.14 versus 80.56 +/- 1.86. fifteen percent of t subjects had global delay (full-scale developmental quotient 

colds accounted for 1.6 million emergency department (ed) visits and 25 million ambulatory visits by children and adults in 1998. although most colds are caused by viruses and do not require medical intervention, many families seek health care for the treatment of colds. parental misconceptions about the cause and appropriate treatment of colds may contribute to unnecessary health service utilization. the objective of this study was to determine predictors of reported ed use and ambulatory care use for colds among families with young children. this study was an observational, prospective cohort study to determine attack rates for respiratory illnesses within families that have at least 1 child who is 6 months to 5 years of age and enrolled in out-of-home child care. families were randomly selected from 5 pediatric practices in massachusetts and were considered eligible when the child was enrolled in child care with at least 5 other children for >or=10 hours per week. enrolled families were asked to complete a survey that assessed knowledge about colds, antibiotic indications, and frequency of health service utilization. predictors of self-reported use of health care services were assessed in multivariate logistic regression models. of the 261 families enrolled in the study, 197 families (75%) returned completed surveys. although 93% of parents understood that viruses caused colds, 66% of parents also believed that colds were caused by bacteria. fifty-three percent believed that antibiotics were needed to treat colds. parents reported that they would visit the ed (23%) or their doctor's office (60%) when their child had a cold. predictors of ed use on multivariate analysis included medicaid insurance (odds ratio [or]: 17.6 [2.2-139.3]), history of wheezing (or: 18.3 [4.4-75.8]), and belief that antibiotics treat colds (or: 4.2 [1.4-12.9]). predictors of ambulatory care use included parent younger than 30 years (or: 10.0 [1.6-64.3]), history of wheezing (or: 5.6 [1.1-29.7]), and belief that antibiotics treat colds (or: 3.8 [1.7-8.5]). misconceptions about the appropriate treatment of colds are predictive of increased health service utilization. targeted educational interventions for families may reduce inappropriate antibiotic-seeking behavior and unnecessary health service utilization for colds.

to provide additional information on the safety of trivalent, cold-adapted influenza vaccine (caiv-t) in children. children 15 to 71 months of age were enrolled in a multicenter, prospective, randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trial to receive by nasal spray caiv-t or placebo. in year 1 (1996-1997), 1314 were enrolled in the 2-dose cohort and 288 were enrolled in the 1-dose cohort. in year 2 (1997-1998), 1358 of the original participants received 1 dose of vaccine or placebo according to their original treatment group assignment. in year 3 (1998-1999) and year 4, the trial continued as an open-label safety trial of caiv-t. a total of 642 and 549 children enrolled in years 3 and 4, respectively, received their third and fourth sequential annual doses of caiv-t. measured were 1) the occurrence of specific respiratory, gastrointestinal and systemic symptoms, unexpected symptoms (not specified in the diary card), and use of medications within the first 10 days after vaccination; 2) the occurrence of an acute illness and use of medication within 11 to 42 days after vaccination; and 3) the occurrence of serious adverse events within 42 days after vaccination. the adjusted odd ratios of specific respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms during the 10 days after vaccination were determined in years 1 and 2. runny nose or nasal congestion, vomiting, muscle aches, and fever were significantly associated with the first dose of caiv-t. with the second dose, runny nose was the only symptom that was associated with caiv-t. in year 2, caiv-t did not cause excess in any of the specific respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. in years 3 and 4, specific respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms were comparable to that observed in year 2. a caiv-t-associated symptom was most likely to occur on day 2 with the first dose of vaccine. the occurrence of unexpected symptoms was primarily of the gastrointestinal system. approximately 6% of caiv-t and 3.6% of placebo recipients had a gastrointestinal symptom. caiv-t seemed to be associated with a mild excess in abdominal pain and vomiting only with the first vaccine dose. a statistically significant increase in the use of analgesics/antipyretics was detected only with the first dose in caiv-t vaccinees compared with placebo recipients (23.5% vs 16.6%). between days 11 and 42, caiv-t use was not associated with an excess of illness, otitis media, or use of medication. none of the 6 serious adverse events in caiv-t recipients in years 1 to 4 was attributed to the vaccine. caiv-t was safe in children. mild respiratory, gastrointestinal, and systemic symptoms of short duration were observed in a minority of children and primarily with the first vaccine dose. sequential annual doses of caiv-t were well tolerated.

to evaluate the effect of uncomplicated viral respiratory infections (colds) on middle ear pressure in healthy school-aged children. children (ages 2-12) with normal tympanograms before onset of illness had bilateral tympanometry daily except weekends for 2 weeks after the onset of a cold. nasopharyngeal secretion obtained at onset of illness was cultured for bacterial pathogens of otitis media using selective agars and tested for rhinovirus, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza a and b, and parainfluenza 1-3 by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction technology. tympanometry was designated as abnormal with peak pressure of < or =-100 dapa or > or =50 dapa and/or a compliance peak of < 0.2 cm(3). eighty-six colds were studied, 82 in schoolchildren (5-12 years old) and 4 in 2- to 3-year-olds. abnormal negative middle ear pressure occurred at least once during the 2 weeks after onset in 57 (66%) of the 86 colds. tympanometry was abnormal in the first week after onset in 50 (88%) of the 57 colds and was abnormal on a single day in 17 (30%) of the 57. the middle ear pressure abnormalities were intermittent and shifted from one ear to the other ear from day to day. reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was positive for a respiratory virus in 56 (65%) of the 86 illnesses. rhinovirus was found in 48% and respiratory syncytial virus in 14%. pathogenic bacteria (streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae, or moraxella catarrhalis) were detected in nasopharyngeal secretion in 29 (34%) of the 86 colds; the bacteria were in high titer (> or =10(3) cfu/ml) in 26 of the 29 positive specimens. none developed illness that required a visit to a physician. age, detection of a respiratory virus, and presence of bacterial pathogen in the nasopharyngeal secretion had a negligible effect on the occurrence of abnormal tympanometry. occurrence of negative middle ear pressure in winter-spring colds was significantly greater than in fall colds for unexplained reasons. transient negative middle ear pressure occurred in two thirds of uncomplicated colds in healthy children. this negative pressure, which may facilitate secondary viral or bacterial otitis media, seems to result from viral infection of the nasopharynx and distal tube causing bilateral eustachian tube dysfunction. tympanometry provides an objective measure of the potential beneficial effects of investigational treatments on the risk of eustachian tube dysfunction/otitis media.

selective head cooling (shc) combined with mild body cooling is currently being evaluated as a potentially therapeutic option in the management of neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. it is proposed that shc enables local hypothermic neuroprotection while minimizing the deleterious side effects of systemic hypothermia. however, there is little evidence that it is possible to cool the brain more than the body for a prolonged period of time. the aim of this study was to examine whether the brain (t(deep brain)) could be cooled to below the rectal temperature (t(rectal)) in our piglet hypoxia ischemia (hi) model for a period of 24 hours, using a head-cooling cap. eight anesthetized piglets (median age: 15 hours) had subdural and intracerebral basal ganglia temperature probes inserted. after a 45-minute global hi insult (known to produce permanent brain damage), shc using a cap perfused with cold water (5 degrees c-24 degrees c) combined with overhead body heating to maintain t(rectal) at 34 to 35 degrees c was performed for 24 hours. the piglets were cooled to a median t(rectal) of 35.0 degrees c (interquartile range [iqr]: 34.7-35.3) for 24 hours. during this time, the median t(deep brain) was 31.4 degrees c (iqr: 30 degrees c-32.2 degrees c), with a median t(rectal) to t(deep brain) gradient of 3.4 degrees c (iqr: 2.7 degrees c-4.8 degrees c). at the end of the cooling period, this gradient was still maintained at a median of 3.3 degrees c (iqr: 2.9 degrees c-3.7 degrees c). the ability to obtain the gradient was not influenced by the size of the piglet (1300-1840 g). cap cooling lowered scalp temperature (t(scalp)) to a median of 24.9 degrees c (iqr: 22.2 degrees c-29.2 degrees c) and subdural temperature to a median of 28.1 degrees c (iqr: 25.8 degrees c-29.5 degrees c) but did not result in either skin injury or superficial brain hemorrhage. there was no clinically useful correlation between t(scalp) and t(deep brain) or between t(scalp) and t(subdural). this study using our piglet hi model shows that it is possible by means of a head-cooling cap to cool the brain more than the body for a 24-hour period while keeping the core temperature mildly hypothermic. however, we were unable to predict temperatures inside the brain using surface temperature probes on the head.

our objective was to investigate the occurrence of snoring in a general population sample of children and to evaluate the association with anthropometric data and clinical findings of oropharynx and nasal airways. a cross-sectional study was conducted with children from primary and secondary schools in civitavecchia and viterbo in the latium region in central italy. the total sample of the survey included 2439 schoolchildren. a total of 2209 children who were ages 10 to 15 years were selected (response rate: 90.5%) according to their snoring frequency during sleep: never, only with colds, occasionally apart from with colds, often. children in the last category were defined as habitual snorers. data were collected by means of questionnaires and clinical examination. a blood sample was collected to determine the concentration of hemoglobin in the blood. logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios (or) and 95% confidence intervals. the prevalence of habitual snorers was 5.6%. boys who were older than 15 years and had a body mass index greater than the 90th percentile were significantly more likely to be snorers. habitual snoring was strongly associated with decreased nasal patency (rhinitis or: 2.13; septal deviation or: 2.75; nasal obstruction or: 2.20). children who had undergone adenoidectomy or had markedly enlarged tonsils were at greater risk of being habitual snorers (or: 4.28 and 5.07, respectively). last, habitual snorers had a significantly higher concentration of hemoglobin in the blood compared with other children. body weight and nasal and pharynx patency seem to be the main determinants of snoring. the finding of higher values of blood hemoglobin concentration in snorers than in nonsnorers suggests that these children could be experiencing oxyhemoglobin desaturation during sleep. taking into consideration the relationship between these different risk factors could lead to a better clinical approach to the snoring child.

the objective of our study was to collect data on the totality of recent skin injuries in normal children and adolescents, and to determine the relationship between the number of injuries, the age of the child, and the time of year in a temperate climate. the participants in this study were children and adolescents seen successively for a reason other than trauma over a period of 1 year, by the first author (j.l.), in a university medical center in québec city, canada. the total body surface, with the exception of the anal-genital area, was examined systematically. the characteristics and location of all recent injuries (bruises, abrasions, scratches, cuts, burns, etc) were recorded. scars from old injuries were ignored. the statistical method used for comparison was the fisher's exact test. two thousand forty examinations were done on 1467 youngsters from 0 to 17 years of age. nine hundred thirty-one examinations were done on boys and 1109 on girls. the majority of children 9 months and older (76.6%) had at least 1 recent skin injury, without a significant difference between the sexes. seventeen percent of the total sample of children had at least 5 injuries, whereas 4% had 10 or more, <1% had 15 or more, and 0.2% had 20 or more. the sites involved were mostly the lower limbs. less than 2% of the total sample of children had injuries to the thorax, abdomen, pelvis, or buttocks, and <1% to the chin, ears, or neck. the majority of injuries observed were bruises, regardless of the time of year. there were, however, more skin injuries during the summer and the proportion of abrasions was higher at this time of the year. the 0- to 8-month age group was unique from all points of view. skin injuries were rare in this age group (11.4%); they did not vary with the season, and they were mainly on the head and the face. their injuries were mostly scratches. bruises were found in only 1.2% of this group. the majority of normal children (after the age of 9 months) and adolescents, who do not consult for trauma, had 1 or more recent skin injuries. these injuries, mostly bruises, are more prevalent in the summer in a region with a temperate climate and can be present on all parts of the body, although they are most frequently observed on the limbs, especially on the shins and knees. even if there are no recognizable marks on the skin, physicians must pay particular attention to children who have injuries with other unusual characteristics (uncommon location, >/=15 injuries, bruises in a child <9 months of age, numerous injuries elsewhere than the lower limbs, numerous injuries in the cold seasons in a temperate climate, injuries other than bruises, abrasions or scratches) because they could be a sign of a bleeding disorder or physical abuse.bruising, child abuse, accidental injury.

to test whether an educational outreach intervention for families and physicians, based on the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) principles of judicious antibiotic use, decreases antimicrobial drug prescribing for children younger than 6 years old. setting. twelve practices affiliated with 2 managed care organizations (mcos) in eastern massachusetts and northwest washington state. patients. all enrolled children younger than 6 years old. practices stratified by mco and size were randomized to intervention or control groups. the intervention included 2 meetings of the practice with a physician peer leader, using cdc-endorsed summaries of judicious prescribing recommendations; feedback on previous prescribing rates were also provided. parents were mailed a cdc brochure on antibiotic use, and supporting materials were displayed in waiting rooms. automated enrollment, ambulatory visit, and pharmacy claims were used to determine rates of antibiotic courses dispensed (antibiotics/person-year) during baseline (1996-1997) and intervention (1997-1998) years. the primary analysis (for children 3 to <36 months and 36 to <72 months) assessed the impact of the intervention among children during the intervention year, controlling for covariates including patient age and baseline prescription rate. confirmatory analyses at the practice level were also performed. the practices cared for 14 468 and 13 460 children in the 2 study years, respectively; 8815 children contributed data in both years. sixty-two percent of antibiotic courses were dispensed for otitis media, 6.5% for pharyngitis, 6.3% for sinusitis, and 9.2% for colds and bronchitis. antibiotic dispensing for children 3 to <36 months old decreased 0.41 antibiotics per person-year (18.6%) in intervention compared with 0.33 (11.5%) in control practices. among children 36 to <72 months old, the rate decreased by 0.21 antibiotics per person-year (15%) in intervention and 0.17 (9.8%) in control practices. multivariate analysis showed an adjusted intervention effect of 16% in the younger and 12% in the older age groups. the direction and approximate magnitude of effect were confirmed in practice-level analyses. a limited simultaneous educational outreach intervention for parents and providers reduced antibiotic use among children in primary care practices, even in the setting of substantial secular trends toward decreased prescribing. future efforts to promote judicious prescribing should continue to build on growing public awareness of antibiotic overuse.

preventing loss of vaccine potency during storage and handling is increasingly important as new, more expensive vaccines are introduced, in at least 1 case requiring a different approach to storage. little information is available about the extent to which staff in private physicians' offices meet quality assurance needs for vaccines or have the necessary equipment. although the national immunization program at the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) in 1997 developed a draft manual to promote reliable vaccine storage and to supplement published information already available from the cdc and the american academy of pediatrics, the best ways to improve vaccine storage and handling have not been defined. to estimate the statewide prevalence of offices with suboptimal storage and handling, to identify the risk factors for suboptimal situations in the offices of private physicians, and to evaluate whether the distribution of a new national immunization program draft manual improved storage and handling practices. population-based survey, including site visits to a stratified, random sample of consenting private physicians' offices. at least 2 months before the site visits, nearly half (intervention group) of the offices were randomly selected to receive a draft cdc manual entitled, "guideline for vaccine storage and handling." the remainder was considered the control group. trained graduate students conducted site visits, all being blinded to whether offices were in the intervention or control groups. each site visit included measurements of refrigerator and freezer temperatures with digital thermometers (digi-thermo, model 15-077-8b, control company, friendswood, tx; specified accuracy +/- 1 degrees c). their metal-tipped probes were left in the center shelf of cold storage compartments for at least 20 minutes to allow them to stabilize. the type of refrigerator/freezer unit, temperature-monitoring equipment, and records were noted, as were the locations of vaccines in refrigerator and freezer, and the presence of expired vaccines. other information collected included the following: staff training, use of written guidelines, receipt of vaccine deliveries, management of problems, number of patients, type of office, type of medical specialty, and the professional educational level of the individual designated as vaccine coordinator. two hundred twenty-one private physicians' offices known by the georgia immunization program in 1997 to immunize children routinely with government-provided vaccines. estimates (prevalence, 95% confidence interval [ci]) of immunization sites found to have a suboptimally stored vaccine at a single point in time, defined as: vaccine past expiration date, at a temperature of =1 degrees c or >/=9 degrees c in a refrigerator or >/=-14 degrees c (recommended for varicella vaccine) in freezer, and odds ratios (ors) for risk factors associated with outcomes. we performed chi(2) analysis and student's t tests to compare the administrative characteristics and quality assurance practices of offices with optimal vaccine storage with those with suboptimal storage, and to compare the proportion of offices with suboptimal storage practices in the groups that did and did not receive the cdc manual. statewide estimates of offices with at least 1 type of suboptimal vaccine storage included: freezer temperatures measuring >/=-14 degrees c = 17% (95% ci: 10.98, 23.06); offices with refrigerator temperatures >/=9 degrees c = 4.5% (95% ci: 1.08, 7.86); offices with expired vaccines = 9% (95% ci: 4.51, 13.37); and offices with at least 1 documented storage problem, 44% (95% ci: 35.79, 51.23). major risk factors associated with vaccine storage outside recommended temperature ranges were: lack of thermometer in freezer (or: 7.15; 95% ci: 3.46, 14.60); use of freezer compartment in small cold storage units (or: 5.46; 95% ci = 2.70, 10.99); lack of thermometer in refrigerator (or: 3.07; 95% ci: 1.15,8.20); and failure to maintain temperature log of freezer (or: 2.70; 95% ci: 1.40, 5.23). offices that adhered to daily temperature monitoring for all vaccine cold storage compartments, compared with those that did not, were 2 to 3 times more likely to assign this task to staff with higher levels of training, have received a recent visit from the state immunization program, and be affiliated with a hospital or have federally qualified health center status. in addition, sites using >1 refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage were more likely to have at least 1 cold storage compartment outside recommended temperature ranges. we found no significant differences in the data reported above between the intervention group (received copy of the draft manual) and the control group (did not receive copy of draft manual), even when controlling for the annual number of immunizations given or the type of office. (abstract truncated)

cysteinyl leukotrienes (cys-lts) are mediators released in asthma and virus-induced wheezing. corticosteroids appear to have little or no effect on this release in vivo. cys-lts are both direct bronchoconstrictors and proinflammatory substances that mediate several steps in the pathophysiology of chronic asthma, including inflammatory cell recruitment, vascular leakage, and possibly airway remodeling. blocking studies show that cys-lts are pivotal mediators in the pathophysiology of asthma. cys-lts are key components in the early and late allergic airway response and also contribute to bronchial obstruction after exercise and hyperventilation of cold, dry air in asthmatics. lt modifiers reduce airway eosinophil numbers and exhaled nitric oxide levels. together these findings support an important role for the cys-lts in the asthma airway inflammation. cys-lt receptor antagonists (cys-ltra) are generally well-tolerated. phase iii randomized, controlled clinical trials (rct) show that lt modifiers are moderately effective, apparently with a particular between-patient variability in their clinical response. the clinical effects of lt modifiers are additive to those of beta-agonists and corticosteroids. the onset of action of lt modifiers is within 1 to several days, and not rapid enough to make them useful as rescue treatment. although lt modifiers possess some antiinflammatory activity, they cannot substitute for corticosteroids for inflammation control. lt modifiers are alternatives to long-acting beta-agonists as complementary treatment to inhaled corticosteroids in pediatric asthma management because they provide bronchodilation and bronchoprotection without development of tolerance, and complement the antiinflammatory activity unchecked by steroids. in addition, the cys-ltra montelukast has been shown to ameliorate asthmatic symptoms and provide bronchoprotection in asthmatic preschool children from 2 years of age, which is of particular importance in this difficult-to-manage group of asthmatics. given their efficacy, antiinflammatory activity, oral administration, and safety, lt modifiers will play an important role in the treatment of asthmatic children.

the economic impact of routine vaccination of preschool children with inactivated influenza vaccine was investigated. a decision analysis was performed using data from the literature. direct and indirect costs of each vaccination strategy were calculated and compared with a strategy of not vaccinating. two settings were evaluated: a setting in which vaccination was available during flexible hours and a setting in which vaccination was available only during usual work hours (8:00 am-5:00 pm). vaccination resulted in a net cost savings in both settings. the net savings per vaccine recipient were $21.28 in the flexible setting and $1.20 in the restricted setting. although the analysis was performed for the inactivated vaccine, sensitivity analysis showed that the nasal vaccine could also result in a net cost savings depending on the price of the cold-adapted vaccine when it is licensed. vaccinating preschool children is economically advantageous. serious consideration should be given to recommending vaccination in this age group.

to assess the role of early respiratory infections in the development of bronchial obstruction in the first 2 years of life, and asthma by the age of 4 years in the oslo birth cohort, established in 1992-1993. having older siblings and attendance to a day care center were also considered as proxy measures of early infections. a total of 2531 children were followed from birth to 4 years of age. experiences of respiratory infections were recorded in the follow-up surveys at 6 and 12 months of age, and children with symptoms and signs of bronchial obstruction during the first 2 years of life were identified and examined. the presence of current asthma was recorded when the children were 4 years old. children with respiratory infections during infancy had a higher risk of having bronchial obstruction during the first 2 years of life and of having asthma at 4 years of age. in logistic regression adjusting for confounders including other infections, the risk of asthma at 4 years of age was related to lower respiratory tract infection (odds ratio [or]: 3.4; 95% confidence interval [ci]: 2.3-7.0), otitis media (or: 1.8; 95% ci: 1.2-2.6), croup (or: 2.1; 95% ci: 1.2-3.7) in the first year and related to the common cold (or: 2.0; 95% ci: 1.3-3.1) in the first 6 months of life. the risk of current asthma was inversely related to older siblings after controlling for early respiratory infections. early respiratory infections indicate increased, rather than decreased, risk of developing bronchial obstruction during the first 2 years of life and of having asthma at 4 years of age.

acute upper respiratory infections are common in children who attend child care, and preventing transmission of disease in this setting depends on actions by child care staff. we set out to discover whether transmission of respiratory infections in child care could be reduced by improved infection control procedures. we performed a cluster, randomized, controlled trial of an infection control intervention conducted in child care centers in 1 city in australia. the intervention was training of child care staff about transmission of infection, handwashing, and aseptic nosewiping technique. implementation of the intervention was recorded by an observer. illness was measured by parent report in telephone interviews every 2 weeks. there were 311 child-years of surveillance for respiratory symptoms. by multivariable analysis, there was no significant reduction in colds in intervention center children across the full age range. however, a significant reduction in respiratory illness was present in children 24 months of age and younger. when compliance with infection control practices was high, colds in these children were reduced by 17%. this trial supports the role of direct transmission of colds in young children in child care. the ability of infection control techniques to reduce episodes of colds in children in child care was limited to children 24 months of age and under.

in response to the dramatic emergence of resistant pneumococci, more judicious use of antibiotics has been advocated. physician beliefs, their prescribing practices, and the attitudes of patients have been evaluated previously in separate studies. this 3-part study included a statewide mailed survey, office chart reviews, and parent telephone interviews. we compared survey responses of 366 licensed pediatricians and family physicians in georgia to recently published recommendations on diagnosis and treatment of upper respiratory infections (uris). we further evaluated 25 randomly selected pediatricians from 119 surveyed in the atlanta metropolitan area. for each, charts from the first 30 patients between the ages of 12 and 72 months seen on a randomly selected date were reviewed for encounters during the preceding year. a sample of parents from each practice were interviewed by telephone. in the survey, physicians agreed that overuse of antibiotics is a major factor contributing to the development of antibiotic resistance (97%), and that they should consider selective pressure for resistance in their decisions on providing antibiotic treatment for uris in children in their practices (83%). however, many reported practices do not conform to the recently published principles for judicious antibiotic use. for example, 69% of physicians considered purulent rhinitis a diagnostic finding for sinusitis; 86% prescribed antibiotics for bronchitis regardless of the duration of cough; and 42% prescribed antibiotics for the common cold. reported practices by family physicians were more often at odds with the published principles: they were significantly more likely than pediatricians to omit pneumatic otoscopy (46% vs 25%); to omit the requirement for prolonged symptoms to diagnose sinusitis (median 4 vs 10 days); and to omit laboratory testing for pharyngitis (27% vs 14%). of the 7531 encounters analyzed in the chart review, 43% resulted in an antibiotic prescription, including 11% of checkups, 18% of telephone calls, and 72% of visits for uris. there was wide variability in the overall antibiotic use rates among the 25 physicians (1-10 courses per child per year). there was an even wider variability in some diagnosis-specific rates; bronchitis and sinusitis in particular. those with the highest antibiotic prescribing rates had up to 30% more return office visits. physicians who prescribed antibiotics for purulent rhinitis were more likely to see parents who believed that their children should be evaluated for cold symptoms. physicians recognize the problem of antibiotic resistance but their reported practices are not in line with recently published recommendations for most pediatric uris. the actual prescribing practices of pediatricians are often considerably different from their close colleagues. patient beliefs are correlated with their own physician's practices.

although the vaccine research and development network in the united states remains vibrant, its continued success requires maintaining harmonious interaction among its many components. changing one component is likely to affect the system overall. an examination of case studies of the development of selected vaccines would allow an examination of the network as a whole. this article presents conclusions drawn from the case study review undertaken. successful development of vaccines is a time-intensive process requiring years of commitment from a network of scientists and a continuum of regulatory and manufacturing entities. we undertook this work to shed light on how well the vaccine development system in the united states performs. the national vaccine advisory committee examined the research and development pathways of several vaccines that reached licensure expeditiously (hepatitis b vaccine, haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccines); some that became licensed only after considerable delay (oral typhoid ty21a vaccine, varicella vaccine); some that are at the point of imminent or recent licensure (reassortant rhesus rotavirus vaccine, which was licensed by the food and drug administration on august 30, 1998) or near submission for licensure (intranasal cold adapted influenza vaccine); and one for which clinical development is slow because of hurdles that must be overcome (respiratory syncytial virus vaccines). some common themes emerged from the reviews of these vaccine "case histories": the expediting influence of a strong scientific base and rationale; the need for firm quantitation of disease burden and clear identification of target populations; the critical role played by individuals or teams who act as "champions" to overcome the inevitable obstacles; availability of relevant animal models, high-quality reagents and standardized assays to measure immune response; the absolute requirement for well designed, meticulously executed clinical trials of vaccine safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy; postlicensure measurements of the public health impact of the vaccine and a track record of the vaccine's safety and acceptance with large-scale use; and the critical need for international collaborations to evaluate vaccines against diseases of global importance that are rare in the united states (eg, typhoid fever). it was clear that the critical step-up from bench scale to pilot lots and then to large-scale production, which depends on a small group of highly trained individuals, is often a particularly vulnerable point in the development process. one fundamental lesson learned is that within the varied and comprehensive us vaccine development infrastructure, multiple and rather distinct paths can be followed to reach vaccine licensure. the national vaccine advisory committee review process should be conducted periodically in the future to ascertain that the us vaccine development network, which has been enormously productive heretofore and has played a leadership role globally, is adapting appropriately to ensure that new, safe, and efficacious vaccines become available in a timely manner.

to describe both the direct and the indirect costs of illness in a closely followed cohort of toddlers attending day care centers (dccs) in québec, canada. fifty-two dccs participated in the study. parents were invited to fill in a calendar on which they would indicate the occurrence of colds, diarrhea, and vomiting, in addition to any actions taken with respect to this occurrence. the participating parents were called biweekly to report the information. the costs reported in this article are based on a period of 6 months of follow-up. the direct costs included medication and visits to a physician whereas indirect costs included alternative care provided by a family member, a babysitter, or an employed parent who missed work. two hundred seventy-three toddlers were followed from 35 to 182 days during the study period. during a 6-month period, the adjusted average costs per child for medication and consultation were $47.47 (standard deviation [sd] = 52.76) and $49.10 (sd = 51.34), respectively, whereas they amount to $11.51 (sd = 51.19) for care by a babysitter, $35.68 (sd = 94.74) for care by a family member, and $117.12 (sd = 210.29) for a parent missing work (when using opportunity cost). the overall adjusted average total costs per child incurred to the parents and society was $260.70 (sd = 301.25). the originality of this study was to comprehensively include all costs associated with the care of an ill child attending dccs. future research should aim at finding economical ways to decrease illness frequency in toddlers attending day care centers and subsequently the costs they incur.

cerebral hypothermia has been shown to reduce damage from experimental hy-poxia-ischemia if started shortly after reperfusion. however, in the newborn infant it may not be feasible to determine prognosis so soon after exposure to asphyxia. the aim of this study was to determine whether head cooling, delayed until shortly before the onset of postasphyxial seizure activity, is neuroprotective. unanesthetized near-term fetal sheep in utero were subjected to 30 minutes of cerebral ischemia. later, at 5.5 hours, they were randomized to either cooling (n = 7) or sham cooling (n = 10) for 72 hours. intrauterine cooling was induced by circulating cold water through a coil around the fetal head. the water temperature was titrated to reduce fetal extradural temperature from 39.1 +/- 0.1 degreesc to between 30 degreesc and 33 degreesc, while maintaining esophageal temperature >37 degreesc. cerebral cooling suppressed the secondary rise in cortical impedance (a measure of cytotoxic edema), but did not prevent delayed seizures, 8 to 30 hours after ischemia. transient metabolic changes including increased plasma lactate and glucose levels were seen with a moderate sustained rise in blood pressure. this severe cerebral insult resulted in depressed residual parietal electroencephalographic activity after 5 days recovery (-14.2 +/- 1.5 decibels), associated with a watershed distribution of neuronal loss (eg, 94 +/- 4% in parasagittal cortex and 77 +/- 4% in the lateral cortex). hypothermia was associated with better recovery of electroencephalographic activity (-8.9% +/- 1.8 decibels) and substantially reduced neuronal loss in the parasagittal cortex (46 +/- 13%), the lateral cortex (9 +/- 4%), and other regions except the cornu ammonis sectors 1 and 2 of the hippocampus. delayed selective head cooling begun before the onset of postischemic seizures and continued for 3 days may have potential to significantly improve the outcome of moderate to severe hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.

effective outpatient care is believed to prevent hospitalization and emergency department (ed) visits resulting from childhood asthma. the aim of this study was to suggest priority areas for intervention by identifying outpatient management practices associated with the risk of these adverse outcomes in a large population. this case-control study included children aged 0 to 14 years with asthma who were members of a regional health maintenance organization. cases were children undergoing either a hospitalization or an ed visit for asthma during the study period. control subjects were children with asthma without a hospitalization or an ed visit during the study period who were matched to patients on age, gender, and number of asthma-related hospitalizations in the past 24 months. data on provider and parent asthma management practices were collected using chart review, closed-ended telephone interviews with parents, and computerized use databases. multivariate analyses were conducted using conditional logistic regression models. data were collected on 508 cases and 990 control subjects. a total of 43% of cases were reported by their parents to have moderately severe or severe asthma, compared with 20% of control subjects. parents of cases with hospitalization were less likely than control subjects to have a written asthma management plan (44% vs 51%) and to report washing bedsheets in hot water at least twice a month (77% vs 86%). cases with hospitalization were more likely to have a nebulizer (74% vs 56%). in the final multivariate model, race/ethnicity was not associated with having had either a hospitalization or an ed visit, as was lower socioeconomic status. having a written asthma management plan [odds ratio (or): 0.54; 95% confidence interval (ci): 0.30, 0.99] and washing bedsheets in hot water at least twice a month (or: 0.45; 95% ci: 0.21, 0.94) were associated with reduced odds of hospitalization. having a written asthma management plan (or: 0.45; 95% ci: 0.27, 0.76) and starting or increasing medications at the onset of a cold or flu were associated with reduced odds of making an ed visit. practices that support early intervention for asthma flare-ups by parents at home, particularly written management plans, are strongly associated with reduced risk of adverse outcomes among children with asthma.

numerous prescription and nonprescription medications are currently available for suppression of cough, a common symptom in children. because adverse effects and overdosage associated with the administration of cough and cold preparations in children have been reported, education of patients and parents about the lack of proven antitussive effects and the potential risks of these products is needed.

to describe parents' opinions and concerns about antibiotics and to contrast these opinions with those of pediatricians. parents were surveyed using an interviewer-administered questionnaire and pediatricians were mailed a self-administered questionnaire. parents from two private practices (n = 300) were largely white (84%) and had completed college (81%). the parents from a community health center (n = 100) were mostly black (80%) and had not completed college (91%). twenty-nine percent of parents were worried that their children were receiving too many antibiotics. eighty-five percent believed there were problems with receiving too many antibiotics, with 55% mentioning resistance or immunity as concerns. eighteen percent of parents had given their child an antibiotic at home before consulting a physician. parents believed that antibiotics were always or sometimes required for ear infections (93%), throat infections (83%), colds (32%), cough (58%), and fever (58%). fourteen percent of parents believed that their child had required an antibiotic when the doctor did not prescribe one, with clinic parents significantly more likely to report this issue (22%) than private practice parents (12%). nine percent believed that their doctor had prescribed an antibiotic unnecessarily (private practice = 12%, community health center = 3%). parents from the private practices were also more likely to report requesting a specific antibiotic (34%) in comparison with 19% of clinic parents. sixty-one percent of the physician surveys were returned after two mailings and a follow-up phone call. the pediatricians had been in practice for a median of 12 years, seeing a median of 110 patients per week. fifty-eight percent of pediatricians reported that some, many, or most of the parents in their practices were worried that their children were receiving too many antibiotics. seventy-one percent indicated that four or more times during the previous month, a parent had requested an antibiotic when the physician believed it was unnecessary, and 35% said that at least occasionally they went along with these requests. sixty-one percent reported that parents requested a different antibiotic from the one they were going to prescribe at least four times in the previous month, and 30% of pediatricians said that they agreed to parents' requests often or most of the time. both the parent and the physician surveys suggest that parents are concerned about the overuse of antibiotics, but often request them when their physicians believe they are unnecessary. parents often administer antibiotics without physician knowledge, and many parents have misconceptions about which illnesses warrant antibiotic therapy. understanding parents' concerns and beliefs about antibiotics and the range of physician practice styles with respect to antibiotics may direct the development of intervention strategies to reduce the inappropriate use of oral antibiotics.

when administered parenterally, furosemide, a loop diuretic, results in improved lung compliance and decreased airway resistance in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia (bpd). however, furosemide-induced diuresis results in hypokalemia, chloride deficiency, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and rickets. in patients with asthma, inhaled furosemide has recently been demonstrated to inhibit the bronchoconstrictive effects of exercise, cold air hyperventilation, and antigen challenge. we hypothesized that inhaled furosemide will result in improved pulmonary mechanics in ventilated infants with bpd and will prevent the systemic complications of parenteral furosemide. to determine the efficacy and safety of a single dose of inhaled furosemide on pulmonary mechanics in infants with severe bpd who are ventilator dependent at 21 days of age. a randomized, double-blind, crossover study was performed on 9 infants with bpd, each serving as his own control. each patient was randomized to receive an aerosol dose of furosemide (1 mg/kg in 2 ml of saline) or placebo (2 ml of saline) on the first day of the study and the other agent the following day of the study. pulmonary mechanics were measured before and 1 and 2 hours after the inhalation using the pulmonary evaluation and diagnostics system. gestational age (mean +/- sem) was 29 +/- 1 weeks; birth weight was 1.1 +/- 0.1 kg; age at study was 47 +/- 6 days; and weight at study was 1.8 +/- 0.2 kg. there was no significant change in the pulmonary function measurements before treatment and 1 or 2 hours after treatment with either placebo or furosemide. baseline and 2-hour values were: dynamic compliance (ml/ cm h2o per kilogram): 0.46 +/- .03 to 0.50 +/- .03 (placebo) and 0.50 +/- 0.02 to 0.51 +/- 0.02 (furosemide); dynamic resistance (cm h2o/l per second): 118 +/- 9 to 106 +/- 7 (placebo) and 111 +/- 8 to 105 +/- 7 (furosemide); and tidal volume (ml/kg): 8.6 +/- 0.5 to 8.9 +/- 0.5 (placebo) and 8.9 +/- 0.2 to 9.4 +/- 0.3 (furosemide). we conclude that, under the conditions of our study, a single dose of 1 mg/kg inhaled furosemide does not improve the pulmonary mechanics in ventilator-dependent infants with severe bpd.

on october 20, 1992, > 40 children from one elementary school visited the school nurse due to the acute onset of blue lips and hands, vomiting, and headache during and after the school lunch periods. forty-nine children were seen by physicians that day and 14 were hospitalized. laboratory analysis revealed methemoglobinemia in many of the children. all recovered in 36 hours. a case-control study was supplemented by environmental and laboratory investigations to determine the outbreak source. cases were selected based on the laboratory diagnosis of methemoglobinemia (methemoglobin level > 2%). children whose methemoglobin levels were missing or < 2% were excluded from analysis. controls were obtained by selecting every third name from a school roster. the parents of 29 students who met the case definition and 52 controls were interviewed. all 29 cases and 33% (17/52) of the controls ate soup during the school lunch (odds ratio undefined, lower 95% confidence limit 16.1). two pots of soup were prepared from ready-to-serve cans, which were diluted with water and enriched with a commercially prepared flavor enhancer. the school's boiler, dormant during the previous 5 months, was restarted on the morning of the outbreak. the boiler also served as a tankless hot water heater. laboratory analysis of the soup identified abnormally high quantities of nitrite (459 ppm) and sodium metaborate, major components of the boiler water treatment solution. undiluted soup from the same lot had 2.0 ppm nitrites; the flavor enhancer had 2.2 ppm nitrites. nitrites were present in the hot potable water system (4 to 10 ppm) and absent in the cold potable water system. this outbreak of methemoglobinemia due to nitrite poisoning was traced to soup contaminated by nitrites in a boiler additive. nitrites are ubiquitous and potentially hazardous inorganic ions. extreme caution should be used when the possibility for toxic human exposure to nitrites exists.

the effect of aspartame on the learning, behavior, and mood of children was evaluated in two experiments. after an overnight fast and a standard breakfast, 20 healthy 9- to 10-year-old children were given the treatments in a double-blind crossover design at 10:30 am. lunch was served at 12:00 noon. in experiment 1, the treatment consisted of an ice slurry of strawberry kool-aid containing 1.75 g/kg of carbohydrate (polycose) plus either aspartame (34 mg/kg) or the equivalent sweetness as sodium cyclamate and amino acids as alanine. in experiment 2, the treatment consisted of a drink of cold unsweetened strawberry kool-aid, containing either 1.75 g/kg of sucrose or 9.7 mg/kg of aspartame. measures of associative learning, arithmetic calculation, activity level, social interaction, and mood were unaffected by treatment in experiment 1. in experiment 2, the only significant treatment effect was that on the frequency of minor and gross motor behaviors, which were less frequent after the consumption of sucrose than after aspartame. thus, the effect of aspartame on the short-term behavior of healthy 9- to 10-year-old children appears to be related to its absence of metabolic consequences rather than to its amino acid composition and putative neurochemical impact.

the trend in the prevalence of reported asthma was determined from data collected by the national center for health statistics. the reported prevalence of ever having asthma increased among 6- to 11-year-old children between the first (1971 to 1974) and second (1976 to 1980) national health and nutrition examination surveys (4.8% to 7.6%, p less than .01). the epidemiology of asthma among children and adolescents 3 to 17 years of age in the united states was examined using data collected in the second national health and nutrition examination survey. in this paper, asthma is defined as current disease diagnosed by a physician and/or frequent trouble with wheezing during the past 12 months, not counting colds or the flu. asthma was reported for 6.7% of youths overall and was higher in black than white children (9.4% v 6.2%, p less than .01), boys than girls (7.8% v 5.5%, p less than .01), and urban than rural areas (7.1% v 5.7%, p less than .05). asthmatic children had a higher prevalence of other allergies (42.6% v 13.2%, p less than .01) and of allergen skin test reactivity (44.5% v 20.7%, p less than .01) than nonasthmatic children. most asthmatics had their first asthmatic episode before their third birthday. no effect of socioeconomic status on the prevalence of asthma was noted.

the incidence of reye syndrome has been decreasing in michigan, perhaps as a result of decreased aspirin use among children. to evaluate possible changes in the frequency of aspirin use, 199 families in tecumseh, mi, with children younger than 18 years of age were interviewed by telephone in february 1981 and again in february 1983. based on the reported use of medications for colds or influenza between 1981 and 1983, fewer parents gave aspirin (56% v 25%), but acetaminophen use did not change (59% v 55%). younger parents and parents who had heard of the association between aspirin and reye syndrome were more likely to stop giving aspirin. more parents chose to use either no medication or medications containing neither aspirin nor acetaminophen (6% v 32%) for the treatment of colds or influenza. approximately 90% of parents who chose not to give aspirin for fever also gave medications for colds or influenza that did not contain aspirin. these results suggest that fewer children are receiving aspirin during illnesses that may precede reye syndrome. the associated decrease in the incidence of reye syndrome tends to support the hypothesis that the use of aspirin increases the risk for the development of reye syndrome.

coughs and colds are seldom associated with serious diseases or complications, but they frequently cause patient discomfort, prompting many telephone calls and visits to hospitals and physicians' offices. parents often harbor misconceptions regarding the etiology, diagnosis, and management of these conditions, leading to inappropriate treatment and home "remedies." the pitfalls associated with treating coughs and colds can be minimized when the physician takes time to educate patients and parents. education should be anticipatory, reassuring, and unrushed. adequate communication requires practice and thought. good techniques include asking open-ended, nonthreatening questions and avoiding the use of jargon. parents must be asked about their understanding of and fears concerning coughs and colds. education must include repetition, with feedback and rewards by someone who believes in the value of education and transfers this belief to patients and parents. effective patient education in the treatment of coughs and colds may be achieved by adopting the above common-sense techniques.

early signals of pathologic causes of nasal obstruction in childhood may pass unnoticed by the unsuspecting physician because these signals mimic innocuous problems such as the common cold, sinusitis, and allergic rhinitis. the hope for early recognition of the more serious causes of nasal obstruction in children depends upon a high degree of suspicion. some of the common and uncommon causes of nasal obstruction are enumerated by categorizing the possible etiologies into congenital, traumatic, iatrogenic, inflammatory, and neoplastic classifications. with a systematic approach that utilizes history, physical examination, and special diagnostic studies, misdiagnosis can be avoided and treatment initiated more rapidly and effectively.

a study was designed to determine the usefulness of cold air inhalation challenge testing in children with asthma and to determine the magnitude and duration of the response. a total of 17 children with asthma, mean age 11.7 years (range 6 to 16 years) and eight nonasthmatic children, mean age 11.5 years (range 7 to 15 years) were studied. the average response to isocapneic hyperventilation with cold air in the asthmatic children was a decrease in vital capacity of 10%, a decrease in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (fev1) of 19%, a decrease in peak flow rate (pfr) of 24%, and a decrease in maximal midexpiratory flow rate (mmfr) of 36%. this was significantly different from the response to the same level of hyperventilation with warm, fully saturated air. the response to isocapneic hyperventilation with cold air in nonasthmatic children was significantly different from the asthmatic children's response with a mean decrease in vital capacity of 0.9%, a decrease in forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 2.5%, a decrease in peak flow rate of 7%, and a decrease in maximal midexpiratory flow rate of 10%. the response in the asthmatic children occurred four to eight minutes after challenge and resolved in eight to 12 minutes. although the response was highly significant, none of the children developed respiratory distress. it was concluded that isocapneic hyperventilation with cold air is a safe and simple test for diagnosing asthma in children.

two young children, aged 2 1/2 and 3 1/2, were briefly exposed to temperatures of -20 degrees f (-29 degrees c) without adequate hand protection. hand contact with snow and metal doorknobs also occurred. second and third degree frostbite of the cold injured digits ensured. within six months, and progressing thereafter, the fingers developed a stubby appearance and demonstrated distal angulation and weak extension. roentgenograms revealed undermineralization of the phalanges and coarsening of the trabecular pattern. the epiphyses of the middle and distal epiphyses were absent or atrophic. the metaphyses were irregularly convoluted. the pathogenesis of this deformity appears to be the direct effect of freezing and of ischemia on the most metabolically active site in the digit--the growth plate.

review of 3,381 records from new hampshire poison center for july through september 1981 and january through march 1982 revealed no seasonal difference in the total number of calls. a significant predominance in the summer reports was noted for plants, pesticides, envenomations, and acetaminophen exposures. during the winter a predominance was noted for aspirin, vitamins, cold and cough remedies, liniments, foods, and calls with no specific agent identified.

little data are available on the use of drugs in children on an outpatient basis. therefore, the present study investigated national patterns in the prescribing of drugs for children by office-based physicians during 1979, in order to describe the most commonly encountered pediatric drug therapies. the data are presented as descriptive norms of drug therapy by office-based physicians in two pediatric subgroups, 0 to 2 years old and 3 to 9 years old. anti-infective drugs and cough and cold preparations accounted for approximately 50% of drugs used. tetracycline and its congeners continue to be used in pediatric patients. despite apparent advantages of amoxicillin, ampicillin is still widely used.

having a mild upper respiratory tract infection does not change the sleep rate proportions or total sleep time of an infant. however, infants with colds exhibit some sleep state specific alterations in sleep apnea. at 40, 44, and 48 weeks postconception, the number of respiratory pauses of 2 to 4.9 seconds and of 5 to 9.9 seconds duration per 100 minutes of state, during rapid eye movement, and indeterminate sleep are decreased in infants with colds. the absence of this phenomenon at 52 weeks suggests that it is modified by maturation. we hypothesize that the reduction in rapid eye movement and indeterminate sleep apnea is a manifestation of an adaptive response in normal infants, but for infants at risk for the sudden infant death syndrome, this response may be overwhelmed, resulting in increased apnea and, in some instances, sudden infant death.

one hundred four preschool-age patients in a private pediatric practice were treated prospectively during colds with either decongestant-antihistamine or placebo to determine if the decongestant-antihistamine mixture was effective in the prevention of otitis media. each child received a standard dosage of the study medicine according to a double-blind, crossover design. otitis media was diagnosed on the basis of clinical criteria. fifteen (6.4%) of 234 colds treated with placebo and 14 (5.8%) of 241 colds treated with the study drug were followed by otitis. the decongestant-antihistamine mixture was not useful in preventing development of otitis media in children with colds.

erythromelalgia is an extraordinary disease which remains elusive in its pathophysiology and management. victims suffer intense burning and redness of the hands and feet. in what appears to be the antithesis of raynaud's disease, the pain is relieved by emersion in cold. a child with erythromelalgia is described whose symptoms began at age 3 years. pharmacological management trials and thermography are incorporated in the report.

solitary thyroid nodules in childhood had a 40% to 70% incidence of malignancy in the era of low-dose therapeutic irradiation. in the last 15 years, 36 children have been evaluated for such nodules, with a final diagnoses of carcinoma in 17%, adenoma in 58%, and miscellaneous diagnoses in 26%. all patients with carcinoma were euthyroid and had no history of irradiation in infancy. treatment included thyroidectomy and full-replacement thyroid therapy. benign neoplasms were often "cold" by scan; all patients were euthyroid except one adolescent body with t3 toxicosis. a majority proved to be follicular adenomas at surgery. miscellaneous benign conditions outnumbered carcinoma and included variations in migration or embryologic development of the thyroid anlagen, thyroiditis, and a thyroid abcess. a 99mtc scan proved more valuable in diagnosis than thyroid function tests: a "hot" nodule usually suggested a developmental abnormality of the thyroid rather than a tumor. our series of children, born since the dangers of irradiation have become common knowledge, suggests there may be a changing trend in the pathology encountered in solitary thryoid nodules.

two children with paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (pch) are described. both cases were associated with cold-warm serum lysins having anti-tja activity. transfusion with compatible frozen-thawed red cells tided these children over the critical acute hemolytic phase of the syndrome. these are the first recorded examples of successful compatible transfusion therapy in pch.

